<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title>Break of Day</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/igp-twss.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
	<div class="galley-rw">
		<section class="body-rw Poem-rw exclude-auto-rw page-open-auto-rw" id="Poem6" epub:type="bodymatter">


         <div class="poem-rw poem-normal-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="poem-normal6">


            <div class="poem-rw poem-title-block-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="poem-title-block6">

<span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_9" epub:type="pagebreak">9</span>

               <h1 id="h18">Break of Day</h1>

            </div>

            <div class="poem-rw poem-body-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="poem-body6">


               <div class="poem-rw stanza-rw" id="stanza14">


                  <p id="p105">There seemed a smell of autumn in the air</p>

                  <p id="p106">At the bleak end of night; he shivered there</p>

                  <p id="p107">In a dank, musty dug-out where he lay,</p>

                  <p id="p108">Legs wrapped in sand-bags,&#8212;lumps of chalk and clay</p>

                  <p id="p109">Spattering his face. Dry-mouthed, he thought, &#8220;To-day</p>

                  <p id="p110">We start the damned attack; and, Lord knows why,</p>

                  <p id="p111">Zero&#8217;s at nine; how bloody if I&#8217;m done in</p>

                  <p id="p112">Under the freedom of that morning sky!&#8221;</p>

                  <p id="id00104">And then he coughed and dozed, cursing the din.</p>

               </div>

               <div class="poem-rw stanza-rw" id="stanza15">


                  <p id="p113">Was it the ghost of autumn in that smell</p>

                  <p id="p114">Of underground, or God&#8217;s blank heart grown kind,</p>

                  <p id="p115">That sent a happy dream to him in hell?&#8212;</p>

                  <p id="p116">Where men are crushed like clods, and crawl to find</p>

                  <p id="p117">Some crater for their wretchedness; who lie</p>

                  <p id="p118">In outcast immolation, doomed to die</p>

                  <p id="p119">Far from clean things or any hope of cheer,</p>

                  <p id="p120">Cowed anger in their eyes, till darkness brims</p>

                  <p id="p121">And roars into their heads, and they can hear</p>

                  <p id="id00105">Old childish talk, and tags of foolish hymns.</p>

               </div>

               <div class="poem-rw stanza-rw" id="stanza16">


                  <p id="p122">He sniffs the chilly air; (his dreaming starts).</p>

                  <p id="p123">He&#8217;s riding in a dusty Sussex lane</p>

                  <p id="p124">In quiet September; slowly night departs;</p>

                  <p id="p125">And he&#8217;s a living soul, absolved from pain.</p>

                  <p id="p126">Beyond the brambled fences where he goes</p>

                  <p id="p127">Are glimmering fields with harvest piled in sheaves,</p>

                  <p id="p128">And tree-tops dark against the stars grown pale;</p>

                  <p id="p129">Then, clear and shrill, a distant farm-cock crows; <span class="pagebreak-rw" id="pagebreak-rw_10" epub:type="pagebreak">10</span>
                  </p>

                  <p id="p130">And there&#8217;s a wall of mist along the vale</p>

                  <p id="p131">Where willows shake their watery-sounding leaves.</p>

                  <p id="p132">He gazes on it all, and scarce believes</p>

                  <p id="p133">That earth is telling its old peaceful tale;</p>

                  <p id="p134">He thanks the blessed world that he was born&#8230;.</p>

                  <p id="id00106">Then, far away, a lonely note of the horn.</p>

               </div>

               <div class="poem-rw stanza-rw" id="stanza17">


                  <p id="p135">They&#8217;re drawing the Big Wood! Unlatch the gate,</p>

                  <p id="p136">And set Golumpus going on the grass:</p>

                  <p id="p137"><i>He</i> knows the corner where it&#8217;s best to wait
                  </p>

                  <p id="p138">And hear the crashing woodland chorus pass;</p>

                  <p id="p139">The corner where old foxes make their track</p>

                  <p id="p140">To the Long Spinney; that&#8217;s the place to be.</p>

                  <p id="p141">The bracken shakes below an ivied tree,</p>

                  <p id="p142">And then a cub looks out; and &#8220;Tally-o-back!&#8221;</p>

                  <p id="p143">He bawls, and swings his thong with volleying crack,&#8212;</p>

                  <p id="p144">All the clean thrill of autumn in his blood,</p>

                  <p id="p145">And hunting surging through him like a flood</p>

                  <p id="p146">In joyous welcome from the untroubled past;</p>

                  <p id="id00107">While the war drifts away, forgotten at last.</p>

               </div>

               <div class="poem-rw stanza-rw" id="stanza18">


                  <p id="p147">Now a red, sleepy sun above the rim</p>

                  <p id="p148">Of twilight stares along the quiet weald,</p>

                  <p id="p149">And the kind, simple country shines revealed</p>

                  <p id="p150">In solitudes of peace, no longer dim.</p>

                  <p id="p151">The old horse lifts his face and thanks the light,</p>

                  <p id="p152">Then stretches down his head to crop the green.</p>

                  <p id="p153">All things that he has loved are in his sight;</p>

                  <p id="p154">The places where his happiness has been</p>

                  <p id="id00108">Are in his eyes, his heart, and they are good.</p>

                  <div class="paras-rw decoration-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="decoration1">


                     <p id="p155">* * * * *</p>

                  </div>

                  <p class="firstpara-rw" id="id00110">Hark! there&#8217;s the horn: they&#8217;re drawing the Big Wood.</p>

               </div>

            </div>

         </div>

      </section>
	</div>
    </body>
</html>
