<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Foreword to this Derivative Version</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="frontmatter-rw Foreword-rw" id="rw-frontmatter-Foreword_49124-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49124-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49124-00001">Foreword to this Derivative Version</h1>
        <p class="title-author-rw" id="rw-title-author_49124-00001">by Infogrid Pacific</p>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49124-00001">About this derivative version</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00001">Jack E. Maxfield's amazing work <i>A Comprehensive Outline of World History</i>, has generously been made available under a Creative Commons license. The topic based nature of this is an ideal content source to illustrate multi-format, remixable content from a valuable, well referenced book or content source.
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49124-00002">We had multiple objectives behind deciding to produce this book into multiple digital formats:</p>
      <ol id="rw-ol_49124-00001">
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00001">It is a valuable reference resource and deserves to be widely available for educational purposes of all types in as many possible formats as possible.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00002">The topic based nature of the structure makes it ideal for demonstrating content remixing which actually delivers useful results from a single work.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00003">It's a large book in terms of word count and structure (number of sections or topics), and has the ability to stretch e-book devices to the limit.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00004">There are sufficient linking references to make the reading navigation experience interesting, and again, push e-book devices to their limit.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00005">The maps contain sufficient detail to be valuable.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00006">The styling is conventional and does not require a lot of treatment or customization.</li>
      </ol>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49124-00002">Remixing the book</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00003">The book has been comprehensively retagged into <i>IGP:FoundationXHTML</i> using <i>IGP:Digital Publisher</i>. The original HTML&#160;pages were imported into <i>IGP:</i><i>Digital Publisher</i> using the manuscript import feature. This converted the HTML&#160;to XHTML&#160;automatically. Once the XML has been created and is available in <i>IGP:</i><i>Digital Publisher</i> the content is ready for action in a number of ways.
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49124-00004">The book is available in multiple formats.</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49124-00005">There you can see this book as a Print PDF, and in various e-book formats. All of these are produced with one click from the <i>IGP:</i><i>Digital Publisher</i><i>Formats On Demand</i> processor. Most importantly we have created several variants using different combinations of the content.
         </p>
      <ol id="rw-ol_49124-00002">
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00007">The entire book using the original structure map is available as 6in x 9in academic style, and A4 manual style PDFs.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00008">The same content is available as an e-pub and a mobipocket file. Please take note of the file sizes before deciding to download it onto your preferred device.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00009">There are two remixed versions which combine objects horizontally through the content at 5000-8000 B.C. and the 19th century. These are also available in the&#160; same format combinations above.</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49124-00010">There is one vertical remixed version covering Africa available in the same format combinations.</li>
      </ol>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49124-00003">How this version differs from the Connexions online version</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00006">The core content remains substantially intact. There has been limited editorial changes made as explained below to make the book relevant for a remixable topic based content approach.</p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49124-00001">Map References</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00007">Map references have been editorialized to remove page position indicators. For example: The positional references "map on the opposite page", has been changed to Map 2.3, or whatever the appropriate numbered references.</p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49124-00002">Internal navigation</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00008">Because the purpose was to turn each topic into a self-contained, remixable object, all internal navigation references such as forward and back have been removed. This left the issue of how to resolve internal inter-topic links. Because we have tried to create a stand-alone topic based reference work, inter-section links have been left as unlinked references in this edition.</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49124-00009">For e-book devices with limited processing power and memory it is appropriate to limit, or even prevent inter-section links as much as possible to improve navigation performance. This is even more important where there are a large number of links.</p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49124-00003">Map positioning</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00010">Maps have been positioned for Online and e-book&#160; presentation in proximity to their reference in text following the rule, "where possible a figure or map must follow its first reference in text". Maps are floated page-top or page-top-next in the PDF output editions.</p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49124-00004">Additional Notes</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00011">Additional notes have been treated as footnotes. This allows them to remain in their context, creates an easy to reference print book, and footnotes are processed to return section end-notes automatically for e-books. Notes and footnotes all have return links processed in automatically by the <i>IGP:Digital Publisher Formats On Demand</i> processor.
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49124-00005">References</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00012">Reference processing was particularly difficult. We wanted to create all sections as self-contained objects, so references for a section were accumulated in a References section at the end of each topic. References have been renumbered linearly within each section which means they loose their original context. We felt it was appropriate for the original context to be maintained, so original reference numbers are included in brackets after the newly generated linear number thus [243] and have a direct external link to the connexions site. These numbers have an XML&#160;element on them which allows them to be hidden for any particular format using CSS selectors.</p>
      <div class="paras-rw decoration-rw" id="rw-paras-decoration_49124-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49124-00013">***</p>
      </div>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00014">&#160;Infogrid Pacific is pleased to make all variant formats of this book available for anyone to reuse anywhere for any purpose within the terms of the Creative Commons license.</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49124-00015">I&#160;would like to give a special thank you to our Demonstration Production Editor <i>Milan Bishwakarma </i>for his tireless efforts in producing this edition. It was a labour of love spanning many months of his spare and own time.
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49124-00016">Lastly we would like to acknowledge the work of Jack E. Maxfield and his family for their generousity in contributing this life-hobby-work to the greater good of mankind.</p>
      <div class="paras-rw leading-line-rw" id="rw-paras-leading-line_49124-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49124-00017">&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;</p>
      </div>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49124-00018" style="text-align: right;">
        <span>
          <i>Richard Pipe  </i>
          <br/>
          <i>CEO Infogrid Pacific&#160;<br/></i>
          <i>May 2010</i>
        </span>
      </p>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


