<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Africa: 700 to 601 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49135-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49135-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49135-00001">Africa: 700 to 601 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49135-00001">AFRICA</h2>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49135-00001">NORTHEAST AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49135-00001">Overpopulation in Yemen, on the Arabian Peninsula, forced bands of Arabs to cross the Red Sea and settle on the northeastern edge of the Ethiopian plateau. They were good farmers and irrigators and got along well with the local Cushitic speaking people who had a similar degree of culture. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00001">1</a></span>) There is some evidence that Phoenicians, with the Egyptian pharaoh's support, were making sailing trips south out of the Red Sea at this time, and perhaps they even circumnavigated Africa.
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49135-00002">Early in the century, the Assyrians under General Esarhaddon, then at the height of his power, swept down and subjected priest-ridden Egypt to tribute and restricted the kings of the 25th (Kushite) dynasty to the country upriver from Thebes. Esarhaddon put Necho, local prince of Sais, in control of the delta region, but subsequently Necho's son, Psammeticus I broke away from the Assyrians and re-established an independent Egyptian kingdom again (26th dynasty-655 B.C.) and even pushed the Nubians and Kushites out of upper Egypt. The chief contribution of the Assyrians to this region was the introduction of iron, which soon spread up the Nile, as the Kushites, retiring back to their capital at Napata, took the knowledge of iron for weapons and tools with them. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00004">4</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00005">5</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00006">6</a></span>)
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49135-00003">In mid-century there were many Greek immigrants to Egypt, including mercenaries, colonists and traders. New crops were introduced such as figs from Turkey, vines from Greece, sheep from Arabia and pigs from Sicily. Currency replaced barter and caravan routes were developed. Slave labor was used in mines and quarries. After 609 B.C. Pharaoh Necho (also Niku II) attempted to run a wide canal from the Nile to the Red Sea and expended the lives of some 120,000 men in the process, but it was never completed. Necho also had an army conquer Palestine, but the Babylonians ran them out after about four years. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00007"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00007">7</a></span>)
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49135-00002">NORTH CENTRAL AND NORTHWEST AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49135-00004">Cyrene, Libya, was the site of an important Spartan Greek colony by about 630 B.C. Carthage had contined to develop and had iron-working in its various settlements, a skill which then crossed the desert through trans-Saharan trade routes. It was at this period that the Assyrians were attacking the Phoenician homeland, and Carthage became increasingly more important as a center for that civilization. Gradually the Carthaginian or Punic dialect and alphabet came to differ from that of the Lebanese Phoenicians. By the end of the century Carthage was receiving Etruscan metals and pottery. Some of the latter was of truly Italian origin and some imitations of Corinthian ceramics. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00008"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00008">8</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00009"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00009">9</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49135-00010"><a href="#rw-num-note_49135-00010">10</a></span>)
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49135-00003">SUBSAHARAN AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49135-00005">On the west side of Africa there was further climatic deterioration after 700 B.C. The spread of people down the Rift Valley into east Africa continued and both cattle and sheep were kept. The central and southern regions had little change from the situation described in the last chapter.</p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49135-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00001">1</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> Robin,</span> Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00007"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00002">2</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, Colin,</span> The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00008"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00003">3</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span>,</span> Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00009"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00004">4</a></span> [28] <span class="sc-rw">C<span class="lc-rw">HEILIK</span>, M<span class="lc-rw">ICHAEL</span>,</span> Ancient History. (Barnes &#38; Noble Books of Harper &#38; Row New York et al, 1969).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00010"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00005">5</a></span> [175] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span>,</span> The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00011"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00006">6</a></span> [213] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">HOMAS</span>, H<span class="lc-rw">UGH</span>,</span> A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00012"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00007"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00007">7</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span>,</span> Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00013"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00008"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00008">8</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00014"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00009"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00009">9</a></span> [66] <span class="sc-rw">Fell, Barry,</span> Saga America. (Times Books, New York, 1980).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49135-00015"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49135-00010"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49135-00010">10</a></span> [75] <span class="sc-rw">G<span class="lc-rw">RANT</span>, M<span class="lc-rw">ICHAEL</span>,</span> The Etruscans. (Chas. Scribner's Sons, New York, 1980).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


