<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Africa: A.D. 901 to 1000</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49151-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49151-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49151-00001">Africa: A.D. 901 to 1000</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49151-00001">AFRICA</h2>
      <h4 id="rw-h4_49151-00001">NORTHEAST AFRICA</h4>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49151-00001">The off-shore islands of Ethiopia thrived on the export of Abyssinian slaves. Some apparently escaped to settle in Danakil and Somali, there to intermarry and become converted to Islam. Inland royal power was assumed in the mountain region of Lasta sometime after A.D. 940 by a non-Semitic Zagwe Dynasty. While these people became Christianized, Semitic farmers expanded southward along the forested spine of Ethiopia to modern Addis Ababa. At the same time Sidama tribesmen invaded from south and east. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49151-00002">In 905 the Turkish Tulunid Dynasty of Egypt gave way to the Ikhshidids who, in turn, were again subject to the Abbasid caliphate of Damascus although this domination was short lived as the empire began to split. At the end of the century the Fatimids moved in from northwestern Africa to take control of Egypt. They were a branch of the Isma'ilites, claiming descent from Mohammed's daughter, Fatima. Sugar cane was now grown in Egypt, with the sugar produced by an advanced process. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00004">4</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49151-00001">NORTH CENTRAL AND NORTHWEST AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49151-00003">We noted in the last chapter that the Aghlabid Dynasty had fallen to the Berbers. In this century these victors welcomed Ubaid Allah, a Shi'ite &#34;Mahdi&#34;<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-17" id="num-footnote-1-17-back">1</a></span> from Syria, who used the Berber armies to establish a new north African, Fatimid Dynasty. They destroyed Tahert and dominated Fez, eventually establishing their capital in Cairo as they assumed control in Egypt. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00005">5</a></span>) The Moroccan Idrisids resisted for some time, but with the Spanish Omayyids attacking also from the north, the Moroccans finally fell to the Fatimids. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00006">6</a></span>) As the Berbers expanded northward in Morocco and the Arabs came westward along the coast, there was a shift in the balance between the sedentary cultivators and the nomadic pastoralists. Nevertheless, Morocco, Algiers and Tunisia had a renewed prosperity with the establishment of great trade routes across the Sahara and increased commerce with Spain. In the desert, itself, however, cruel famines were suffered by small towns and warfare contributed further to their demise. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00007"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00007">7</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00008"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00008">8</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49151-00002">SUBSAHARAN AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49151-00005">By the end of this century most of Africa was out of the Stone Age. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00009"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00009">9</a></span>) It was the time of the apogee of the Kingdom of Ghana with its capital at Kumbi and extending from near the Atlantic coast almost to Timbuktu. It was essentially Negro, consisting of a group of federated tribes with a fairly well developed culture. Writing of the wealth and wisdom of this African kingdom, the Moslem Ibn Hawqal said that Ghana boasted that its people had hoards of gold and &#34;the wealthiest of all kings on the face of the earth&#34;<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-2-18" id="num-footnote-2-18-back">2</a></span>. The recently excavated city of Jenne-jeno reached the height of its development and by the end of the century may have had close to 20,000 people. This and satellite communities had penetrated the marketplace of North Africa. Goods, produce and gold flowed north via river and caravan while Saharan salt and Mediterranean glass beads came south. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00010"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00010">10</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49151-00007">Pressure from the Berbers now forced the city-states of Chad to unite into a kingdom called Kanem-Bornu, or the Kanuri Empire, founded by a desert people and having the longest surviving dynasty in history, not being overthrown until the 19th century. A trans-Saharan slave trade running from west Africa east to the Arabs began in this century and lasted for hundreds of years. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00012"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00012">12</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00013"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00013">13</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00014"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00014">14</a></span>) The Arabs began to colonize the east coast as far south as Zanzibar but never reached or knew of Madagascar, in this century. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00015"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00015">15</a></span>) Ancestors of present day Kikuyu tribes migrated into Kenya from the south. They were Bantu-speakers who were in the process of spreading out from the Congo in the transition period from Stone Age hunting to the Iron Age and agriculture. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00016"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00016">16</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00017"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00017">17</a></span>) Zimbabwe continued to be occupied by the Shona people who traded in copper and gold.&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49151-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00008"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00001">1</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span></span>, Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00009"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00002">2</a></span> [270] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">UTZER</span>, K<span class="lc-rw">ARL</span> W</span>., &#34;Empires, Capitals and Landscapes of Ancient Ethiopia&#34;, Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 30-37, Sept./Oct. 1982.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00010"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00003">3</a></span> [137] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00011"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00004">4</a></span> [260] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">RAUDEL</span>, F<span class="lc-rw">ERNAND</span></span>, Civilization ~ Capitalism - Volume I, The Structures of Everyday Life. (Translated from French by Sian Reynolds). (Harper ~ Row, Publishers, New York, 1981.&#160;
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00012"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00005">5</a></span> [8]. <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span></span>, Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00013"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00006">6</a></span> [137] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00014"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00007"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00007">7</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00015"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00008"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00008">8</a></span> [176] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span></span>, The World's Last Mysteries. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., Pleasantville, New York, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00016"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00009"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00009">9</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span></span>, Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00017"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00010"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00010">10</a></span> [268.] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">INTOSH</span>, S<span class="lc-rw">USAN &#38; </span>R<span class="lc-rw">ODERICK</span></span>, &#34;Finding West Africa's Oldest City&#34;, National Geographic 162: 396-417, Sept. 1982.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00018"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00011"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00011">11</a></span> [154] <span class="sc-rw">N<span class="lc-rw">ATIONAL</span> G<span class="lc-rw">EOGRAPHIC</span> S<span class="lc-rw">OCIETY</span></span>, &#34;Africa: Its Political Development&#34;, Cartographic Division, National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C., Feb. 1980.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00019"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00012"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00012">12</a></span> [175] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span></span>, The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00020"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00013"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00013">13</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00021"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00014"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00014">14</a></span> [213] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">HOMAS</span>, H<span class="lc-rw">UGH</span></span>, A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00022"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00015"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00015">15</a></span> [175] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span></span>, The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00023"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00016"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00016">16</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49151-00024"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49151-00017"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49151-00017">17</a></span> [137] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).
            </p>
      </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49151-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49151-00004"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-17"><a href="#num-footnote-1-17-back">1</a></span>. &#160;&#34;Mahdi&#34; is a Moslem title of an expected spiritual and temporal ruler destined to reign righteously over the world
            </p>
        </div>
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49151-00002">
          <p id="rw-p_49151-00006"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-2-18"><a href="#num-footnote-2-18-back">2</a></span>. &#160;Quotation from historical map of the National Geographic Society, (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49151-00011"><a href="#rw-num-note_49151-00011">11</a></span>)
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


