<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Africa: A.D. 1101 to 1200</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49153-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49153-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49153-00001">Africa: A.D. 1101 to 1200</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49153-00001">AFRICA</h2>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49153-00001">NORTHEAST AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49153-00001">This was a period of building in the Lasta Kingdom of Ethiopia, with imported Egyptian artisans and materials for church construction. One of the greatest of the Lasta Zagwe kings was Lalibela, who came to power in 1195. Ethiopian records of this era were not kept indefinitely because later dominant dynasties considered the Zagwe an &#34;usurping&#34; one. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00001">1</a></span>) The cathedral built about A.D. 700 in Qasr Ibrim, Nubia, was originally dedicated to the Virgin Mary, but after a raid in 1172-1173 by Shams ed-Dowla, brother of Saladin, it was converted into a mosque. Its ruins remain today as a small island in Lake Nasser. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49153-00002">The death throes of the Fatimid caliphate came about not by Christian Crusaders but by the expansion of Nureddin and his Zangid Sultanate from Syria. Nureddin continued to live at Mosul and let Egypt be ruled by a Kurdish general, Saladin, who then proceeded to set up his own Ayyubid Dynasty in 1174. Islam glorified in the integrity and justice of his rule and even Christendom acknowledged him as a gentleman and scholar, even though a foe. At his death in 1193 his realm again became divided. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00004">4</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49153-00002">NORTH CENTRAL AND NORTHWEST AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49153-00003">The Norman, Roger of Sicily, annexed the Zirid Emirate of Tunisia about 1153, but as Saladin took over Egypt, a Shi'ite empire was created farther west by a Berber tribe led by another supposed &#34;Mahdi&#34; and this Almohade Dynasty<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-21" id="num-footnote-1-21-back">1</a></span> replaced the Almoravids and gave Barbary its finest hour. They defeated the remaining Zirids and finally even ran the Normans from Tunisia. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00005">5</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00006">6</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49153-00003">SUBSAHARAN AFRICA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49153-00005">The Tellem people continued to flourish in Mali. Men wore robes made of cotton strips sewn together, with waistbands or leather aprons and cotton caps. The women wore short fiber aprons, occasionally with the front pulled back between the legs to fasten to a waistband behind. They had leather sandals decorated with incised geometric designs, leather bags and knife sheaths. Personal ornamentation included beads, iron, wood or bronze pendants, iron and leather bracelets and cylindrical quartz plugs worn in noses or ears of both sexes.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49153-00006">Ife, a kingdom south of Nok (Nigeria), flourished from 1100 to 1500 and produced the greatest artistic creations of tropical Africa. Ife bronzes were cast by the &#34;lost wax&#34; process which is still in use for some purposes today. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00007"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00007">7</a></span>) Timbuktu was a trade center of this century, servicing the empires of Manding and Songhoy. Great stone buildings were erected in Great Zimbabwe as the Shona people made it the capital of their powerful state. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00008"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00008">8</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49153-00009"><a href="#rw-num-note_49153-00009">9</a></span>) (Please also see the 15th century C.E. where there is a summary of several centuries of activity in this part of Africa).&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49153-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00007"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00001">1</a></span> 270. B<span class="lc-rw">UTZER</span>, K<span class="lc-rw">ARL</span> W., &#34;Empires, Capitals and Landscapes of Ancient Ethiopia&#34;, Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 30-37, Sept./Oct. 1982.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00008"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00002">2</a></span> [271] <span class="sc-rw">A<span class="lc-rw">NDERSON</span>, R<span class="lc-rw">OBERT</span> D.</span>, &#34;Qasr Ibrim: Watchdog of the Nile&#34;, Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 58-60, Sept./Oct. 1982.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00009"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00003">3</a></span> [137] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00010"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00004">4</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span></span>, Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00011"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00005">5</a></span> [137] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00012"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00006">6</a></span> [83] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">ALLETT</span> R<span class="lc-rw">OBIN</span></span>, Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00013"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00007"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00007">7</a></span> [175] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span></span>, The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00014"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00008"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00008">8</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49153-00015"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49153-00009"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49153-00009">9</a></span> [35] <span class="sc-rw">C<span class="lc-rw">OBB</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES</span> E.,JR</span>., &#34;After Rhodesia, a Nation named Zimbabwe&#34;, National Geographic 160: 616-651, Nov. 1981).
            </p>
      </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49153-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49153-00004"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-21"><a href="#num-footnote-1-21-back">1</a></span>. &#160;In newer terminology this is the Muwahid Dynasty
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


