<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: 1500 to 1000 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49201-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49201-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49201-00001">Central and Northern Asia: 1500 to 1000 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49201-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49201-00001">Iranian (Indo-European) tribes occupied all of the area of south central Asia from the Aral Sea to the Tarim Basin, and gradually extended their territories on east toward China and southeast into the Indian peninsula. At about 1,000 B.C. Iranians of Transoxia found that a rider could manage his horse on a battlefield, initiating a weapon that ultimately outmoded the chariot. It is assumed that the Mongolian and the Hunnish-Turkish peoples were multiplying in the farther north and northeastern reaches of Asia, but little actual information is available. In the 13th century B.C. in south Siberia, the Karasuk Culture developed from the Androvonova, and there was a change from settled communities to seasonal nomadism. Small curved knives similar to those at An-Yang in China have been found. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49201-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49201-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49201-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49201-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49201-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49201-00002"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49201-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49201-00001">1</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49201-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49201-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49201-00002">2</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">LYN</span></span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


