<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: 1000 to 700 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49202-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49202-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49202-00001">Central and Northern Asia: 1000 to 700 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49202-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49202-00001">South central Asia was now occupied by various migrating Indo-European tribes, some moving gradually south between the Aral and Caspian seas and others moving west toward the southern Russian steppe. Ordos, the region of Mongolia lying inside the loop of the Yellow River where it turns north, was inhabited by nomadic tribes, including the Hsiung-nu, an Altaic-speaking Mongoloid people.<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-116" id="num-footnote-1-116-back">1</a></span> Broad daggers, curved knives, harness ornaments and belt plaques with animal profiles have been among the remnants found. Rock carvings in Tibet along the upper Indus River valley in Ladakh on the Tibetian-Kashmir border dating 2,000 to 3,000 years ago indicate Stone Age hunters with bows and arrows. Due to a gradual continued rise of the Himalayan arc and the resulting lessening of the effective rainfall through the centuries much of this area is now desert. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49202-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49202-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49202-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49202-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49202-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49202-00003">3</a></span>) &#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49202-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49202-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49202-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49202-00001">1</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49202-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49202-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49202-00002">2</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">LYN</span></span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49202-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49202-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49202-00003">3</a></span> [182] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">IPLEY</span>, S. D<span class="lc-rw">ILLON</span></span>, &#34;Tibet: the high &#38; fragile land behind the ranges&#34;, Smithsonian Jan. 1981, pp. 97-105.
            </p>
      </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49202-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49202-00002"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-116"><a href="#num-footnote-1-116-back">1</a></span>. &#160;Some authorities deny that the Hsiung-nu can be identified as a separate people on the borders of China until the 2nd century B.C. &#160;See references 45 and 127 and this manuscript under 4th century B.C., CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA.
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


