<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: 700 to 601 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49203-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49203-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49203-00001">Central and Northern Asia: 700 to 601 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49203-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49203-00001">The Hsiung-nu of the Mongolian region had horses of various breeds, among them one with an upright mane. They, like the Huns of probable later descent, were expert horsemen. East of Mongolia excavations have revealed the Tagar Culture, dating back to 700 B.C. and continuing for about 600 years. This included a semi-settled people who designed animals on small knives, belt and harness plaques and broad daggers. The latter have also been found in South Russia and on the northern borders of China.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49203-00002">The Iranians of Tranoxiana were a mixed group of tribes. Some, who moved on into southern Russia were known as Scythians while their kinsmen who remained behind became known as Sakas. The Medes had pretty well left this area to settle in Iran south of the Caspian, but behind them came their cousins, the Persians. Zoraster was born along the Oxus River in this century and did much of his teaching in Khurasan. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49203-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49203-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49203-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49203-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49203-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49203-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49203-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49203-00004">4</a></span>)&#160;&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49203-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49203-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49203-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49203-00001">1</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49203-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49203-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49203-00002">2</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49203-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49203-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49203-00003">3</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">LYN</span></span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49203-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49203-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49203-00004">4</a></span> [127] <span class="sc-rw">M<span class="lc-rw">AENCHEN</span>-H<span class="lc-rw">ELFEN</span>, O<span class="lc-rw">TTO</span> J.</span>, The World of the Huns. (Edited by Max Knight and background by Paul Alexander), University of California Press, Berkeley 1973).&#160;
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


