<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: 500 to 401 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49205-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49205-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49205-00001">Central and Northern Asia: 500 to 401 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49205-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49205-00001">There were people in the Altai Mountains of southern Siberia and an advanced people lived near Minusinsk, some 800 miles northeast of Lake Balkash and some 200 miles north of the northwestern corner of Mongolia in the Ordos region of Siberia. The Rockefeller Collection contains a bronze reindeer mounted on a marble base representing a known Tagar Period of art from that location. As mentioned in previous chapters this same Tagar Culture has been found in more southern areas of Asia, also. The Persian Empire extended well up into central Asia from the Aral Sea to the edge of the Tarim Basin and north of this the unconquered Sakas roamed at will. Just north of the Aral Sea, at Issik near Alma Alta, one thousand gold objects dating to this 5th century B.C. have been excavated, indicating that this had been an important trade route. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49205-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49205-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49205-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49205-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49205-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49205-00003">3</a></span>) &#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49205-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49205-00002"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49205-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49205-00001">1</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">LYN</span></span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49205-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49205-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49205-00002">2</a></span> [183] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">OCKEFELLER</span> (NELSON) C<span class="lc-rw">OLLECTION</span></span>. (The Nelson Rockefeller Collection, Inc., New York, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49205-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49205-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49205-00003">3</a></span> [176] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span></span>, The World's Last Mysteries. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., Pleasantville, New York, 1978).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


