<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: 400 to 301 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49206-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49206-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49206-00001">Central and Northern Asia: 400 to 301 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49206-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49206-00001">At Pasyryk in the Altai Mountains of southern Siberia eight burials, dated from the 4th to the 2nd centuries B.C., have been excavated. These contained wooden chariots, textiles and furniture as well as men with skin tattoos, all well preseved by the perpetual frost. The Tagar Culture continued throughout much of the rest of Siberia. South central Asia was overrun by Alexander as he went from Afghanistan through the Hindu Kush to Bukhara and Tashkent. At the very end of the century, however, the Mauryan Dynasty of India took over a large part of Afghanistan.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49206-00002">As we shall see in the section on CHINA, below, the non-Chinese people of Mongolia and the adjacent part of Siberia had now about completed their slow transition into full horse nomadism and they began to attack the Chinese perimeter, as well as even taking to the sea toward Japan. Skulls from the Lake Baikal region of northern Mongolia, dated to this era, are low faced skulls of the pre-Hsuing-nu population, and were different from the later high-faced skulls of the true Hsuing-nu. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49206-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49206-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49206-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49206-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49206-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49206-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49206-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49206-00004">4</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49206-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49206-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49206-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49206-00001">1</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">LYN</span></span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49206-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49206-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49206-00002">2</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49206-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49206-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49206-00003">3</a></span> [101] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">UCKER</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES</span> O.</span>, China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49206-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49206-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49206-00004">4</a></span> [127] <span class="sc-rw">M<span class="lc-rw">AENCHEN</span>-H<span class="lc-rw">ELFEN</span>, O<span class="lc-rw">TTO</span> J.</span>, The World of the Huns. (Edited by Max Knight and background by Paul Alexander), University of California Press, Berkeley 1973).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


