<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: 300 to 201 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49207-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49207-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49207-00001">Central and Northern Asia: 300 to 201 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49207-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49207-00001">The homeland of the Parthians was on the eastern shore of the Caspian Sea and about 247 B.C. they moved south, taking territory away from the Seleucids, under their leader, Arsaces. Bactria became independent at 250 B.C. as a Greco-Bactrian kingdom under Diodotus, and it became the center of a web of caravan routes linking Siberia and China with India, Persia and the Mediterranean cities. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49207-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49207-00001">1</a></span>) Farther north in Siberia, Tagar Culture groups continued as in recent centuries. In Inner Mongolia, the Hsiung-nu was just forming as the first great confederation of Altaic-speaking nomads. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49207-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49207-00002">2</a></span>) Afghanistan was ruled by the Maurya Dynasty of India, until this entire area was reclaimed by the Syrian Antiochus III at the end of the century.&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49207-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49207-00002"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49207-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49207-00001">1</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49207-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49207-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49207-00002">2</a></span> [101] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">UCKER</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES</span> O.</span>, China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


