<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: A.D. 301 to 400</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49213-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49213-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49213-00001">Central and Northern Asia: A.D. 301 to 400</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49213-00001">CENTRAL ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49213-00001">In this century the Persians continued to rule and populate both Afghanistan and Turkistan, introducing Zorastrianism to the area. In 371 the Ephthalites (White Huns<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-119" id="num-footnote-1-119-back">1</a></span>) invaded the upper Oxus (ancient Bactria) but the Persian Shapur II came to an understanding with them and subsequently these people actually guarded this part of the Persian domain.&#160;
         </p>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49213-00003">It was apparently a sharpening of the climate in this part of the world which forced the nomadic tribes to other pastures toward the end of this 4th century. Rather than go east against strong China, even after the fall of the Han Dynasty, many of the Huns turned west, riding bony, rough haired, small headed horses with short, strong legs, needing little water and covering over 60 miles a day. (See footnote on previous page). As we have seen in the paragraphs above, other peoples were ahead of them, in the greatest mass migrations known, before or since. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49213-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49213-00001">1</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49213-00004">Up through this century Tibet was divided into 13 principalities with war continually raging between them. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49213-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49213-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49213-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49213-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49213-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49213-00001">1</a></span> [33] <span class="sc-rw">C<span class="lc-rw">LARK</span>, K<span class="lc-rw">ENNETH</span></span>, Civilization. (Harper &#38; Row, New York &#38; Evanston, 1969).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49213-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49213-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49213-00002">2</a></span> [272] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">ONG</span>, E<span class="lc-rw">NZHENG</span>; L<span class="lc-rw">ENG</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">IAN AND</span> W<span class="lc-rw">ANGDUI</span>, S<span class="lc-rw">UOLANG</span></span>, &#34;Unraveling Tibetan Prehistory at Karuo&#34;, Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 62, Sept./Oct. 1982.
            </p>
      </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49213-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49213-00002"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-119"><a href="#num-footnote-1-119-back">1</a></span>. &#160;See footnote under IRAN, 5th century C.E.
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


