<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: A.D. 1001 to 1100</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49220-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49220-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49220-00001">Central and Northern Asia: A.D. 1001 to 1100</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49220-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49220-00001">Early in the century Mahmud the Turk, ruler of Afghanistan, moved out of his base at Ghazni to conquer most of Persia and the Punjab of India, along with most of central Asia, establishing the greatest empire of this period. Ghazni equaled Baghdad as a cultural center of Islam. Khwaja Abdallah Ansari (1006-1088), who was to become the patron saint of Herat in eastern Afghanistan, lived among the mullahs and doctors of law, preaching his religious philosophy in the center of this Moslem area. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49220-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49220-00001">1</a></span>) Mahmud's empire was short-lived, however, as the Seljuq Turks descended from Transoxiana to take Asiatic Islam piece by piece. The great Seljuq sultan, Malik-Shah, had as his general a still more famous Suleiman. Just north of the Sel juqs were the Karkhanis Turks and still north of them were the Ghuzz, parent body of the off-shoot Seljuqs. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49220-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49220-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49220-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49220-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49220-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49220-00004">4</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49220-00002">Still farther north the Uigurs were active on the northwest China border. Little is known about the great expanse of Siberia specifically at this time, but certainly one must assume that it was sparsely inhabited with northern Mongoloid hunters.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49220-00003">Tibet, although previously influenced by Nepal and Kashmir of India, now began to show a character of its own, particularly in its art work, which demonstrated special talent in inlays of gold and silver. It was already a country full of missionaries, monks and monasteries. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49220-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49220-00005">5</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49220-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49220-00006">6</a></span>) &#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49220-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49220-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49220-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49220-00001">1</a></span> [144] <span class="sc-rw">M<span class="lc-rw">ICHAUD</span>, R<span class="lc-rw">OLAND AND</span> S<span class="lc-rw">ABRINA</span></span>, &#34;Afghanistan: A Record of a Timeless Culture now threatened with change&#34;, Smithsonian, Nov. 1980, page 48.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49220-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49220-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49220-00002">2</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49220-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49220-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49220-00003">3</a></span> [144] <span class="sc-rw">M<span class="lc-rw">ICHAUD</span>, R<span class="lc-rw">OLAND AND</span> S<span class="lc-rw">ABRINA</span></span>, &#34;Afghanistan: A Record of a Timeless Culture now threatened with change&#34;, Smithsonian, Nov. 1980, page 48.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49220-00007"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49220-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49220-00004">4</a></span> [137] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span></span>, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49220-00008"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49220-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49220-00005">5</a></span> [19] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">RITISH</span> M<span class="lc-rw">USEUM</span> G<span class="lc-rw">UIDE</span></span>, (British Museum Publications Limited, 6 Bedford Sq., London).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49220-00009"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49220-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49220-00006">6</a></span> [157] <span class="sc-rw">N<span class="lc-rw">ATIONAL</span> G<span class="lc-rw">EOGRAPHIC</span> S<span class="lc-rw">OCIETY</span></span>, &#34;Demons and Lamas in the High Himalayas&#34;, Great Religions of the World, National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition.
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


