<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>Central and Northern Asia: A.D. 1501 to 1600</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49225-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49225-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49225-00001">Central and Northern Asia: A.D. 1501 to 1600</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49225-00001">CENTRAL AND NORTHERN ASIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49225-00001">About 1505 the southern, central area of Samarkand, Bukhara and Tashkent (including the area also known as Khorezm) was invaded from the northwest by Muslim Uzbeks, formerly called &#34;Sarts&#34; and representing a remnant of the Golden Horde. Khorezm then became known as the Khanate of Khiva, after its capital. Kazan and Astrakhan were taken from Islam by Ivan IV, the Terrible, in mid-century, chiefly with the use of artillery. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00001">1</a></span>) Later an Uzbek leader, Abdullah, extended his rule over parts of Persia, Afghanistan and even Chinese Turkistan, for a short period. The little empire then broke up into separate khanates and emirates. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00003">3</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49225-00002">Farther north a revived Mongol power under Altan Khan (1550-73) was giving the Chinese considerable pressure. In the west, the first advance into Siberia by the Cossack chieftan, Yermak, heralded the Russian eastward migration. Yermak was backed by a rich merchant family, the Poyarskis, although the only profitable occupation in Siberia at that time was fur-trapping. That great land area was occupied sparsely by a great number of Turko-Mongolian tribes, including the Chukchi, Koryaks and Kamchadali of the far northeast; Lamuts, Yakuts, Tungusy and Ostyaks north of China; and Samoyeds, more Ostyaks and Tartars just east of the Ural Mountains. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00004">4</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00005">5</a></span>) In the arctic north of western Siberia around the mouth of the Yenisey River reindeer herders lived chiefly off those animals. They rode and milked the partially tamed ones and ate the wild ones. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00006">6</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49225-00003">In Tibet, the name &#34;Dalai Lama&#34; was given to the Tibetan theocrat by a 16th century Mongol ruler and the term has come to mean &#34;Ocean of Wisdom&#34;. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49225-00007"><a href="#rw-num-note_49225-00007">7</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49225-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00001">1</a></span> [260] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">RAUDEL</span>, F<span class="lc-rw">ERNAND</span></span>, Civilization ~ Capitalism - Volume I, The Structures of Everyday Life. (Translated from French by Sian Reynolds). (Harper ~ Row, Publishers, New York, 1981.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00002">2</a></span> [38] <span class="sc-rw">C<span class="lc-rw">OLUMBIA</span> E<span class="lc-rw">NCYCLOPEDIA</span></span><span class="lc-rw">,</span> 3rd Edition. (Columbia University Press, New York and London, 1963).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00003">3</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00007"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00004">4</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00008"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00005">5</a></span> [122]&#160; <span class="sc-rw">L<span class="lc-rw">EWINSOHN</span>, R<span class="lc-rw">ICHARD</span></span>, Animals, Men and Myths. (Translated from German). (Harper &#38; Brothers, New York 1954).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00009"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00006">6</a></span> [288] &#34;<span class="sc-rw">P<span class="lc-rw">EOPLES OF THE</span> A<span class="lc-rw">RCTIC</span>&#34;</span>, Cartographic Division, National Geographic, Feb. 1983.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49225-00010"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49225-00007"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49225-00007">7</a></span> [228] <span class="sc-rw">W<span class="lc-rw">ARD, <span class="uc-rw">F</span>RED</span></span>, &#34;In Long-Forbidden Tibet&#34;, National Geographic 157: 218, Feb. 1980.
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


