<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Indian Subcontinent: 500 to 401 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49273-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49273-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49273-00001">The Indian Subcontinent: 500 to 401 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49273-00001">THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT (THE THIRD GREAT CENTER OF CIVILIZATION)</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49273-00001">This was a continued time of troubles in India, with political deterioration. While previously there had been some sixteen great realms along the rich Gangetic plain, the number was now gradually reduced to four - the three kingdoms of Kasi, Kosala and Magadha and the Republic of Vrijji. Nevertheless, some of the arts and sciences flourished in this valley. Most of the Indus Valley remained under Persian control. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49273-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49273-00001">1</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49273-00002">The direction of growth of India and some of its limiting factors had been pretty well determined in this century in which Buddha died. By the end of the century Buddhism had already faded in this land of its birth and the major outlines of the religious world-view which was to govern all future Indian history had emerged, although not yet organized in its present day form. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49273-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49273-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49273-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49273-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49273-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49273-00001">1</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, Colin,</span> The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49273-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49273-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49273-00002">2</a></span> [46] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">URANT</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILL</span>,</span> The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part I - Our Oriental Heritage. (1954).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


