<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Indian Subcontinent: 300 to 201 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49275-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49275-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49275-00001">The Indian Subcontinent: 300 to 201 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49275-00001">THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49275-00001">Ashoka Vardhana (also Asoka), grandson of Chandragupta, came to the throne in 273 B.C., monarch of Afghanistan, Baluchistan and all of modern India except Tamil Land in the extreme south. At first he ruled well, although cruelly. In midlife he became intensely interested in Buddhism, changed his ways, joined a Buddhist order and became an ardent missionary and zealous administrator. He was hated by the Brahmins, the priestly class of the old religion, and in spite of Ashoka's Buddhism it was in this century that Hinduism finally evolved with a new generation of gods; Shiva, Vishnu, Rama and Brahma. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49275-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49275-00001">1</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49275-00002">On the &#34;Rock Edicts of Ashoka&#34; appear &#34;Arabic&#34; numerals - a thousand years before they appear in Arabic literature. These numerals are one of our great heritages from India. Among inscriptions of this century are statements that hospitals had been established for humans and for animals, although it is not clear if these were the first. Elaborate dispensaries and special maternal and operating facilities were also described. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49275-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49275-00002">2</a></span>) Most artisans of the Maurya Empire worked in guilds which eventually developed many features similar to trade unions. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49275-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49275-00003">3</a></span>) After Ashoka's death, the empire was split into a number of parts.&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49275-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49275-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49275-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49275-00001">1</a></span> [213] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">HOMAS</span>, Hugh,</span> A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49275-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49275-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49275-00002">2</a></span> [125] <span class="sc-rw">L<span class="lc-rw">YONS</span>, A<span class="lc-rw">LBERT S., M.D. AND</span> P<span class="lc-rw">ETRUCELLI, R</span>. J<span class="lc-rw">OSEPH, M.D</span>.,</span> Medicine - An Illustrated History. (Harry N. Abrams, Inc. New York 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49275-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49275-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49275-00003">3</a></span> [213] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">HOMAS</span>, H<span class="lc-rw">UGH</span>,</span> A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


