<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Indian Subcontinent: A.D. 501 to 600</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49283-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49283-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49283-00001">The Indian Subcontinent: A.D. 501 to 600</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49283-00001">THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49283-00001">Chaos continued from the Ephthalite invasions throughout the failing Gupta Empire in the north. The invaders were finally defeated by a Hindu confederation in 528 but they had profoundly affected the caste system and disrupted the heirarchy of ruling families. Some Ephthalites stayed in India as a distinct group. In spite of the warfare, great scientific progress was made in this northern India area, with advances in chemistry such as calcination, distillation, sublimation, production of light without heat, the mixing of anesthetic and soporific powders and the formation of metallic salts, compounds and alloys. Brahmagupta, the astronomer, lived near the end of the century and systematized rules of arithmetic, algebra and astronomy and developed an integral solution of an indeterminate equation. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49283-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49283-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49283-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49283-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49283-00002">The third branch of Buddhism, Tantric, appeared in the Himalayan lands, interlacing Mahayana Buddhism with old Tantric cults of India that invoked deities by magic and rituals. There was a large array of divinities both male and female, along with demons. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49283-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49283-00003">3</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49283-00003">The Deccan was not unified again until about 550, under the western Calukya Dynasty. Southern India remained essentially Dravidian, but little is known of its detailed history and nothing of its art until the end of this century when the Pallavas ruled from north of Madras to the sacred river, Kaseri, and had sculptures and cave temples. Still farther south were the Pandyas and Ceras. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49283-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49283-00004">4</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49283-00004">In Ceylon, the original Veddas were conquered by Sinhalese invaders from northern India and the Veddas survive today only as a small group in the remote interior. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49283-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49283-00005">5</a></span>) (Continue on page 445)&#160;&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49283-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49283-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49283-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49283-00001">1</a></span> [38] <span class="sc-rw">C<span class="lc-rw">OLUMBIA</span> E<span class="lc-rw">NCYCLOPEDIA</span>,</span> 3rd Edition. (Columbia University Press, New York and London, 1963).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49283-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49283-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49283-00002">2</a></span> [46] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">URANT</span>, Will,</span> The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part I - Our Oriental Heritage. (1954).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49283-00007"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49283-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49283-00003">3</a></span> [114] <span class="sc-rw">K<span class="lc-rw">ITAGAWA</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">OSEPH M.</span>,</span> &#34;The Eightfold Path to Nirvana&#34;, Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49283-00008"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49283-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49283-00004">4</a></span> [19] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">RITISH</span> M<span class="lc-rw">USEUM</span> G<span class="lc-rw">UIDE</span>,</span> (British Museum Publications Limited, 6 Bedford Sq., London).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49283-00009"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49283-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49283-00005">5</a></span> [175] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span>,</span> The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).&#160;
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


