<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Indian Subcontinent: A.D. 1201 to 1300</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49290-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49290-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49290-00001">The Indian Subcontinent: A.D. 1201 to 1300</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49290-00001">THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49290-00001">We noted in the last chapter that after 1186 the Moslem Turk, Muizzudin Muhammad, led his forces down from Afghanistan to set up the Sultanate of Delhi. The first 13th century ruler (A.D. 1206) of this new dynasty was Qutbuddin Aibak, a general of Muhammad's, who established a capital at Delhi. By 1235 this sultanate had extended from the Sind to Bengal and continued to gradually expand. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49290-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49290-00001">1</a></span>) The general policy of those Turkish sultans of India are indicated by Ala-ud-din 's instructions to his advisors near the end of the century to the effect that they should draw up rules and regulations for grinding down the Hindus and depriving them of wealth and prosperity. Although politically succumbing to these invaders, 4/5 of the people of India remained Hindus although impoverished. Lacking power to resist they took refuge in supernatural consolations.&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49290-00002">Hinduism argued that both mastery and slavery were superficial delusions and concluded that freedom of body or nation was hardly worth defining in so brief a life. That was and is the secret of India. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49290-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49290-00002">2</a></span>) Metallic guns with powder, but not cannon, were in use in India by 1275. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49290-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49290-00003">3</a></span>) (Continue on page 684)&#160;&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49290-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49290-00003"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49290-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49290-00001">1</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49290-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49290-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49290-00002">2</a></span> [46] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">URANT</span>, Will,</span> The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part I - Our Oriental Heritage. (1954).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49290-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49290-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49290-00003">3</a></span> [213] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">HOMAS</span>, Hugh,</span> A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


