<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Far East: 700 to 601 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49305-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49305-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49305-00001">The Far East: 700 to 601 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49305-00001">THE FAR EAST</h2>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49305-00001">CHINA AND MANCHURIA (Continued Chou Dynasty)</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49305-00001">The many provinces of early China gradually coalesced into five states covering what is now the district of Honan and some adjacent areas. The most important provinces were T'si, where the basic type of Chinese government developed, and Chin (or Tsin), which gave to China the name by which it is known to nearly all the world but itself. The organizing genius of T'si was Huan Chung, adviser to the Duke of Huan (683-640 B.C.). As prime minister, Kuan Chung replaced bronze with iron weapons and tools. Cast iron was used either in this century or the early 6th B.C., some 1,000 years before it was used in Europe. Sophisticated kilns developed for firing ceramics laid the foundation for this, in reaching the very high temperatures (1,835 degrees centigrade) necessary. T'si became a well ordered state with a stable currency and efficient administration. A code of manners, ceremonies and a sense of honor was developed and served as a substitute for religion among the upper classes. Extensive canals irrigated fields and agriculture and the silk industry prospered. Huan Chung taught the farmers to dig drainage ditches, stored surplus grain and rented farm equipment for them. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49305-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49305-00001">1</a></span>) Carts were used, leather shoes were worn, and houses were well built, with tables and chairs available. In the early years of the Spring and Autumn Era of the Eastern Chou, warfare was really more of a polite gamesmanship with very limited real fighting and few people hurt or killed. The art of diplomacy was supreme. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49305-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49305-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49305-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49305-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49305-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49305-00004">4</a></span>) &#160;
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49305-00002">JAPAN</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49305-00002">Three elements appear to be mingled in the Japanese race: A primitive white strain through the Ainus, who seem to have entered Japan from the region of the Amur River in Neolithic times; a yellow Mongol strain, coming from or through Korea in this 7th century B.C.; and a brown-black Malay and Indonesian strain, filtering in from the western Pacific islands. Gradually a new race developed from this 7th century on. In the Japanese mythology, 660 B.C. dates the legendary first emperor, Jimmu. &#160;</p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49305-00003">KOREA AND SOUTHEAST ASIA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49305-00003">Neolithic societies continued as previously, with metal in use in Thailand.</p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49305-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49305-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49305-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49305-00001">1</a></span> [222] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">RAGER</span>, James,</span> The Peoples Chronology. (Holt, Rinehart &#38; Winston, New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49305-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49305-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49305-00002">2</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, Glyn</span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49305-00006"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49305-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49305-00003">3</a></span> [46] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">URANT</span>, Will,</span> The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part I - Our Oriental Heritage. (1954).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49305-00007"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49305-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49305-00004">4</a></span> [101] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">UCKER</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES O</span>.,</span> China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


