<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Far East: A.D. 901 to 1000</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49321-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49321-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49321-00001">The Far East: A.D. 901 to 1000</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49321-00001">THE FAR EAST</h2>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49321-00001">CHINA AND MANCHURIA (T'ang to 907, Divided Kingdom to 960 and then Sung Dynasty)</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49321-00001">In Manchuria (and a part of Mongolia) Khitan tribes established the Liao Dynasty about A.D. 916 and overran part of China as the T'ang Dynasty collapsed. The Liao administration was well established in the P'o Hai area of eastern Manchuria by 934 and they executed invasions of northern China in 936 and 960, using siege machines, metaled corselets and helmets, with disciplined troops organized on a decimal system similar to that of the ancient Assyrians and the Mongol armies of the future. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00001">1</a></span>) The name &#34;Cathay&#34; was derived from Khitae or Ch'i-tan, as they were sometimes called. They resisted Sinicization better than any other invader and retained their tribal nomadic life while remaining essentially Shamanists. Their use of human sacrifice and brutish punishments were particularly offensive to the Chinese. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00002">2</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00003">3</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00004">4</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00005">5</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00002">Having become the dominant war-lord of north China by 900, Chu Wen soon took the imperial T'ang court at Ch'ang-an under his protection and then slaughtered the ruling eunuchs. He followed this in 904 by murdering the emperor himself, installing a boy successor for three years and then taking over the throne personally. But with this turmoil and the Liao pressure, China broke up into the &#34;Age of the Ten States&#34;. It was only in 960 that reunification was accomplished by General Chao-Kuang-yin who founded the northern Sung Dynasty, using a bureaucracy of Confucian officials and an almost socialistic control of the economy. The Sung, however, had to pay tribute to the Manchurian Liao all through this and the next century and they were never able to recover the northern tier of Chinese provinces.. In Charles Hucker 's classification the year 960 marks the end of the Early Empire of China. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00006">6</a></span>)
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00003">Throughout all the political changes of the century the cave temples of Dunhuang, mentioned in the previous chapter, went undisturbed and, in fact, carving in the caves continued. Today there are still 492 grottoes on five distinct levels. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00007"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00007">7</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00008"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00008">8</a></span>) Paper money first appeared in A.D. 950 and the first report of chemical explosives for military use was in A.D. 1,000. By that time the Chinese seemed to have achieved biological accommodations to their previous infections and the population began to jump rapidly. In spite of malaria, bilharzias, and dengue fever the Yangtze Valley was finally conquered. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00009"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00009">9</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00010"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00010">10</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00004">By the year A.D. 1,000 China had reached its &#34;modern&#34; form and it changed very little thereafter until the 20th century. In comparison with the West, the limitations of this society were:&#160;</p>
      <ol id="rw-ol_49321-00001">
        <li id="rw-li_49321-00001">Human agriculture production (instead of animal and plow) kept a narrow margin between subsistence and production per agricultural head and gave less chance for a high standard of living for common people &#160;</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49321-00002">A low level of peasant consumption of artisan products, which were essentially restricted to landlords and officials. European manufacturing, although on cruder material, catered to a wider base &#160;</li>
        <li id="rw-li_49321-00003">Merchants were disreputable in China, as Confucius had ranked them near the bottom of the social scale. This inhibited the development of massive mercantile capital and hindered trade abroad. Thus, exploitation of Chinese inventions like paper, porcelain and gun-powder had to wait for the looser ordered society of western Europe. This was one of the side effects of the &#34;command&#34; system mentioned at the beginning of this chapter (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00011"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00011">11</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00012"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00012">12</a></span>)
            </li>
      </ol>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49321-00002">JAPAN</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49321-00005">Under Daigo, greatest of the emperors set up by the Fujiwara clan, Japan continued to absorb and began to rival the culture and luxury of China. The period 901 to 922 is called the &#34;Engi period&#34; and was the acme of the Golden Age. Wealth accumulated and gave rise to great luxuriousness in dress, cuisine, manners, arts and tastes. Literature flourished as the syllabary simplification of Chinese characters allowed extensive writing in the Japanese language. In 905 the Kokinshu, an anthology of over 1,000 poems in Japanese, was completed by imperial order and within a century Japanese prose was to rise to great heights. The imperial family's Shintoism fell into disuse.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00006">The curtain that the Fujiwaras put around the throne was not meant to stifle its occupant but only to shield it. When an emperor showed talent and interest he did not exercise power while remaining emperor, but would abdicate in favor of one of his children, go to a monastery, set up his own court and administration and there he would run the Fujiwaras, who ran Japan. It is Bergamini's (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00013"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00013">13</a></span>) concept that throughout history, even including the time of World War II and Pearl Harbor, that the imperial family always ran Japan, although they exerted their domination through the powerful families of the court, such as the Fujiwaras<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-271" id="num-footnote-1-271-back">1</a></span>. By A.D. 950 the emperors, who had never set up royal lands for their own income, found themselves dependent on the Fu jiwaras for money and at the same time the nation seemed to fall apart into baronial estates, each with its own Iron Age companies of soldiers. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00014"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00014">14</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00015"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00015">15</a></span>) Further epidemics of the &#34;coughing violence&#34; (probably whooping cough) between 920 and 923, mumps in 959 and an unknown pestilence of 994 and 995 when over one-half of the population of Japan died, undoubtedly contributed to the decay of the state as the century progressed. Chinese acupuncture had spread to Japan by the end of this century and a medical school was founded by Wake Hiroya, based on Chinese methodology. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00016"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00016">16</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00017"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00017">17</a></span>)
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49321-00003">KOREA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49321-00008">In A.D. 918 the Koryo Dynasty began in west central Korea and was to rule for almost 500 years. By 935 it had peacefully absorbed the Silla area, uniting the country. Late in the century the Liao of Manchuria began to threaten the Koreans, just as they had the Chinese, and this was only the first of many invasions that occurred in the next several centuries. In this adversity the Koreans turned to Buddhism and built many temples. The ceramics of this period are perhaps the finest expression of Korean art. Chinese acupuncture had spread to Korea by the end of this century. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00020"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00020">20</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00021"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00021">21</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00022"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00022">22</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <h3 id="rw-h3_49321-00004">SOUTHEAST ASIA</h3>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49321-00009">After 15000 years the Vietnamese rebelled against the Chinese Sungs in the Red River Delta and gained independence as Dai Viet, or Annam, which is presently North Vietnam. Although traditionally hostile to the Chinese, these people absorbed much of the Chinese character, copied Chinese industrial and agricultural techniques and followed the Confucian political ethic. In Thailand, the Dvaravati continued in power and the great&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00010">Khmer Empire carried on in Cambodia with Yasovarman I proceeding with the fabulous construction projects, including a reservoir some five square miles in size and a stone pyramid to honor himself. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00023"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00023">23</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00024"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00024">24</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00011">In Java there was a shift of the cultural center to the eastern part of the island and this situation was to continue for the next five centuries. The great Buddhist temple of Borobudur in the center of Java, however, continued to inspire its followers. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00025"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00025">25</a></span>) There was no significant change in Sumatra from the last century.&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49321-00012">Southeast Asia's medical systems were a mixture of Chinese, Indian and Arabic disciplines. The Arabic influence, coming in part from the Greeks, showed up in the four humors (phlegm, blood, bile and wind) whereas Indian concepts were seen in the placement of the soul in the spinal column and instruction in methods of breathing. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00026"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00026">26</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00027"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00027">27</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49321-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00013"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00001">1</a></span> [279] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">NEILL</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILLIAM H</span>.,</span> The Pursuit of Power. (University of Chicago Press, 1982).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00014"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00002">2</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, Glyn</span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00015"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00003">3</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00016"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00004">4</a></span> [68] <span class="sc-rw">G<span class="lc-rw">ARRATY</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">OHN A</span>. and Gay, Peter,</span> (Editors), The Columbia History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, New York, 1972).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00017"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00005">5</a></span> [101] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">UCKER</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES O</span>.,</span> China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00018"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00006">6</a></span> [101] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">UCKER</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES O</span>.,</span> China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00019"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00007"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00007">7</a></span> [282] <span class="sc-rw">P<span class="lc-rw">EKARIK</span>, A<span class="lc-rw">NDREW J</span>.,</span> &#34;The Cave Temples of Dunbruang&#34;, Archaeology 36, Vol. 1: 20-27, Jan./Feb. 1983.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00020"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00008"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00008">8</a></span> [285] <span class="sc-rw">K<span class="lc-rw">ERSHAW</span>, N<span class="lc-rw">ORMA</span>,</span> &#34;Journey to the Caves of China&#34;, Archaeology 36, Vol. I: 66-69, Jan./Feb. 1983.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00021"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00009"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00009">9</a></span> [101] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">UCKER</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">HARLES O</span>.,</span> China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00022"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00010"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00010">10</a></span> [140] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">NEILL</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILLIAM H</span>.,</span> Plagues and Peoples. (Anchor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, New York 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00023"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00011"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00011">11</a></span> [139] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">NEILL</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILLIAM H</span>.,</span> The Rise of the West. (The University of Chicago Press, 1963).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00024"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00012"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00012">12</a></span> [279] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">NEILL</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILLIAM H</span>.,</span> The Pursuit of Power. (University of Chicago Press, 1982).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00025"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00013"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00013">13</a></span> [12] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ERGAMINI</span>, D<span class="lc-rw">AVID</span>,</span> Japan's Imperial Conspiracy&#34; (Wm. Morrow &#38; Co., Inc., N.Y., 1971).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00026"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00014"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00014">14</a></span> [46] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">URANT</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILL</span>,</span> The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part I - Our Oriental Heritage. (1954).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00027"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00015"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00015">15</a></span> [12] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ERGAMINI</span>, D<span class="lc-rw">AVID</span>,</span> Japan's Imperial Conspiracy&#34; (Wm. Morrow &#38; Co., Inc., N.Y., 1971).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00028"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00016"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00016">16</a></span> [140] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">NEILL</span>, W<span class="lc-rw">ILLIAM H</span>.,</span> Plagues and Peoples. (Anchor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, New York 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00029"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00017"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00017">17</a></span> [125]&#160; <span class="sc-rw">L<span class="lc-rw">YONS</span>, A<span class="lc-rw">LBERT S., M.D. AND</span> P<span class="lc-rw">ETRUCELLI, R</span>. J<span class="lc-rw">OSEPH, M.D</span>.,</span> Medicine - An Illustrated History. (Harry N. Abrams, Inc. New York 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00030"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00018"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00018">18</a></span> [12] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ERGAMINI</span>, D<span class="lc-rw">AVID</span>,</span> Japan's Imperial Conspiracy&#34; (Wm. Morrow &#38; Co., Inc., N.Y., 1971).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00031"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00019"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00019">19</a></span> [242] <span class="sc-rw">P<span class="lc-rw">EFFER</span>, N<span class="lc-rw">ATHANIAL</span>,</span> The Far East. (Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1958).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00032"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00020"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00020">20</a></span> [173] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">AMSEY L.G.G</span>.,</span> The Complete Encyclopedia of Antiques. (Hawthorn Books, Inc., New York, 1962).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00033"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00021"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00021">21</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, Glyn</span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00034"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00022"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00022">22</a></span> [125]&#160; <span class="sc-rw">L<span class="lc-rw">YONS</span>, A<span class="lc-rw">LBERT S., M.D. AND</span> P<span class="lc-rw">ETRUCELLI, R</span>. J<span class="lc-rw">OSEPH, M.D</span>.,</span> Medicine - An Illustrated History. (Harry N. Abrams, Inc. New York 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00035"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00023"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00023">23</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00036"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00024"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00024">24</a></span> [176] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span>,</span> The World's Last Mysteries. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., Pleasantville, New York, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00037"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00025"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00025">25</a></span> [286] <span class="sc-rw">M<span class="lc-rw">ORTON, W</span>. B<span class="lc-rw">ROWN</span>,</span> III, &#34;Indonesia Rescues Ancient Borobudur&#34;, National Geographic 163: 126-142, Jan. 1983.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00038"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00026"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00026">26</a></span> [19] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">RITISH MUSEUM</span> G<span class="lc-rw">UIDE</span>,</span> (British Museum Publications Limited, 6 Bedford Sq., London).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49321-00039"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49321-00027"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49321-00027">27</a></span> [125]&#160; <span class="sc-rw">L<span class="lc-rw">YONS</span>, A<span class="lc-rw">LBERT S., M.D. AND</span> P<span class="lc-rw">ETRUCELLI, R</span>. J<span class="lc-rw">OSEPH, M.D</span>.,</span> Medicine - An Illustrated History. (Harry N. Abrams, Inc. New York 1978).
            </p>
      </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49321-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49321-00007"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-271"><a href="#num-footnote-1-271-back">1</a></span>. &#160;This concept of true power resting ultimately in the Japanese emperor from the beginning throughout history to the 20th century is a relatively new one, put forth by Bergamini in his book published in 1971. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00018"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00018">18</a></span>) The previously unanimous view was typified in the 1958 text of Peffer (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49321-00019"><a href="#rw-num-note_49321-00019">19</a></span>) when he says that: &#34;In any analysis of the major elements in the composition of the Japanese scheme, the emperor deserves a minor place&#34;. (Page 39) He felt that the emperor's cabinet and Diet were the ornamental and dignified figureheads with the reality being in others, at least until very recent times&#160;
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


