<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Near East: 5000 to 3000 B.C.</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49335-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49335-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49335-00001">The Near East: 5000 to 3000 B.C.</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49335-00001">ARABIAN PENINSULA<b><br/></b></h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49335-00001">This was the fount and breeding place of the Semitic peoples, although at this particular time only Bedouins and nomad tribesmen existed and there was no true civilization, at least in the western two-thirds of the peninsula. Recent excavations on the Island of Bahrain and adjacent Saudi Arabia have suggested the presence of a vanished empire which the Sumerians referred to as &#34;Dilmun&#34;, center of earthly paradise. Excavated objects indicate commercial activity oriented both towards India and Mesopotamia. Surface shards and implements have been dated back to about 4,000 B.C. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00003">1</a></span>) Apparently after the Wet Phase, about 4,000 B.C. there was a progressive dessication of the Arabian peninsula which may have contributed to the northward migrations of peoples into the Syrian Desert which began shortly thereafter. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00002">2</a></span>)<span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00003"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00003">1</a></span></p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49335-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00002"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00003">1</a></span>C. and their use was extended to Egypt even before the first dynasty, that is, before 3100 B.C. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00004"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00005">3</a></span>) Another recent writer, Hamblin (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00005"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00006">4</a></span>), however, although agreeing that domestication occurred among the southern Arabian tribes, would put the date much later, at 2500 B.C.
            </p>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49335-00002">MEDITERRANEAN COASTAL AREAS OF ISRAEL AND LEBANON</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49335-00003">The people of the coast in these early millennia may have been of the original Mediterranean race now represented in this part of the world only by the Georgian Caucasians. Timnal, in southern Israel, was a source of large amounts of surf ace ores of malachite, so there was a Chalcolithic Palestinian civilization called the Ghassulian Culture, using the first deliberate alloy, arsenical copper. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00006"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00007">5</a></span>) The original locations of coastal towns, and later major cities, was occasioned to great extent by the location of springs and thus there has of ten resulted continuous occupation of the same spots over many centuries, with the consequent rise of debris mounds, or tells (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00007"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00008">6</a></span>).<span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00008"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00002">2</a></span></p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49335-00002">
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00002">2</a></span>C., Jemmeh in the northwestern Negev desert was occupied by a small group of Chalcolithic hunting and farming people, but subsequently it was apparently abandoned for some 1,300 to 1,400 years. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00009"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00009">7</a></span>)
            </p>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49335-00003">IRAQ AND SYRIA</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49335-00005">Iraq is the area of the ancient Mesopotamia, a word derived from mesos meaning &#34;between&#34; and potamos or &#34;river&#34;. The wheel and the plow are thought by most to have been invented or brought here sometime about 3,500 B.C.1. Cattle were used as beasts of burden about the same time. There is evidence of irrigation on a steppe east of Mesopotamia by 5,000 B.C., and classically historians have described three more or less separate civilizations which developed in the river basins of Mesopotamia perhaps as early as 4,500 B.C. The most important of these will be discussed first:&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49335-00006"><b>SUMER</b> (On the Euphrates River)All historians seem agreed that the Sumerians were non-Semitic, but their origin is much disputed. Some have suggested Iberian or Dravidian affinities. McEvedy (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00010"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00010">8</a></span>) thinks they may have been part of the aboriginal Caucasian people and to this is added the opinion of Sir Leonard Woolley (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00011"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00011">9</a></span>) that their language was that of the early Caucasians. They used copper from 5,000 B.C. onward and their clay tablets give us records back to 3,300 B.C. in the city of Ur, which was then a seaport. The geography of Mesopotamia has changed greatly through the millennia. In addition to the Tigris and Euphrates, the Karun River from the Persian mountains and Wadi al Batin, draining the heart of Arabia, all enter the Persian Gulf, the latter two at almost right angles to the former two. Many millennia ago, the last two rivers discharged a mass of silt across the gulf, which then extended even north of present day Baghdad, and eventually made a bar against which similar silt of the two chief rivers piled up, forming dry land directly across the gulf. The effect was to turn the upper end of the then existing gulf into a stagnant lake which was still fed by the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates, but which then turned from salty to brackish and then to actual fresh water. Eventually, of course, even the lake built up with silt, making the area the most fertile land on earth. Although Ur, then on the sea coast, became the great capital of Sumer, the city of Eridu, south of this, seems older and in a nearby village of al'Ubaid there has been found ancient pottery, in some ways similar to pottery also found at Susa, in ancient Elam and which might have a common ancestry from some foreign place. Could the origin be Bahrain, the island down the gulf where Danish excavations now show a civilization possibly older than Sumer? There is a Sumerian legend which tells how a race of monsters, half fish and half human, came from the Persian Gulf, led by Oannes, and introduced the arts of writing, agriculture and metallurgy.
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49335-00007">The Sumerians had wheeled vehicles<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-295" id="num-footnote-1-295-back">1</a></span>, wheel-made pottery, sailboats and animal-drawn plows. The sailboats were of particular interest because recent information indicating a much greater and extensive maritime trade with large, reed, wash-through ships has been made available. Thor Heyerdahl, constructing such a ship from the reeds of the Tigris Euphrates delta region in 1980 has demonstrated that such ships could sail to India and to Africa. The concept that the civilization of Bahrain may have antedated Sumer is compatible with a new theory suggested by Heyerdahl (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00012"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00012">10</a></span>) and discussed under II,C of this chapter. From the records of Ur there is evidence of the presence of boats of almost one hundred tons and a ceramic boat model in the Iraq Museum with a cylindrical footing for its mast dates back to at least 4,000 B.C. The potters' wheel was invented in Erech about 3,000 B.C., perhaps along with the brick mold.&#160;&#160;
         </p>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49335-00009">These same Sumerians developed the duodecimal system of measurement giving rise to our twelve inches to the foot, sixty minutes in an hour and three hundred sixty degrees in a circle. In addition to the island &#34;Dilmun&#34;, they mention &#34;Magan&#34; as a distant copper mountain and &#34;Meluhha&#34; which may well have been the great Indus Valley civilization. At 5,000 B.C. they had primitive irrigation systems used to water fields as far as three miles on either side of a river. The resulting larger and richer crops, along with the necessity of water administration systems, probably led to the growth of some of the towns. Eventually, however, this leaching out of the earth's salts led to soil infertility. The food of Sumer included barley, wheat, millett, chickenpeas, lentils, beans, turnips, onions, garlic, leeks, cucumbers, lettuce, cress and mustard. There was plenty of fish and some beef and veal if one could afford it. The beef source, however, was from animals after their useful worklife was over and therefore it was tough. Mutton was common along with goat and pork, the last only until about 1,800 B.C. The Indo-European nomads roaming through the Mid-East may have started the loathing of pork, since they could be herded only with difficulty and had little stamina for movement. Forty percent of the Sumerian grain yield was used for ale production, but since no hops were available there was no true beer.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49335-00010">A temple workman received the equivalent of 2.2 American pints of ale a day and senior dignitaries five times that amount, some of which they may have used as currency. The cultivated grape came to Mesopotamia from the Caucasus about 5,000 B.C. and in later years, as the irrigation soured the soil and grain became more difficult to grow, many people took to either grape or date wines. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00014"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00014">12</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00015"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00015">13</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00016"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00016">14</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00017"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00017">15</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00018"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00018">16</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00019"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00019">17</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00020"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00020">18</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <p id="rw-p_49335-00011"><b>AKKADIA-KISH</b> This second center of civilization consisted of a Semitic people living to the north and west of Sumer with a separate culture. There is evidence that their Third Dynasty was in effect as early as 3,638 B.C. More will be heard about them in the next chapter.
         </p>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49335-00004">IRAN (PERSIA)</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49335-00012">A third center of civilization with copper weapons and tools, hieroglyphic writing and domesticated animals appeared east of Sumer, with a capital at Susa. Older writers thought that they might have been a Negroid<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-2-296" id="num-footnote-2-296-back">2</a></span> people, some moderns feel that they were probably the ancestors of the Medes, while McEvedy (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00021"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00021">19</a></span>) writes that they were relatives of the Sumerians, in that they were a part of the original Caucasian race of Georgians. We are speaking of the ancient country of Elam, a part of present Iran. There was much copper around the southern Caucasus, the shore of the Caspian Sea and down to the Persian Gulf. Remains of a Chalcolithic culture have been found at Anau, Tepe Hissar and Rarjy dating to 3,000 B.C. Painted pottery cultures with mixed farming and trade activity existed in central Iran in the 2nd half of the 5th Millennium. Copper lying free had been found and hammered into utensils beginning about 7,000 B.C. and about 5,000 B.C. copper was obtained by firing malachite which releases the flowing metal at a relatively low temperature. Tin ore, of ten found with malachite, soon yielded its metal and the tin-copper (bronze) alloy resulted in some areas by 3,800 B.C. The best bronze, consisting of 15% tin, is three times as hard as copper alone. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00022"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00022">20</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00023"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00023">21</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00024"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00024">22</a></span>)
         </p>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49335-00005">ASIA MINOR</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49335-00014">In this era there were colonies of the Cycladian civilization along the coast and a well developed Chalcolithic culture of basic Caucasian peoples inland. A 1978 study of skeletons from a dig at Kalinkaya in central Anatolia, dating to this period, indicated that the people were relatively short, the men averaging five feet four inches and the women just five feet. 20% of the women had healed ankle fractures or foot bone changes, probably from falls in their rocky country homes. There is some indication of nutritional stress in bowed tibiae, flattened long bones and flattened pelvic inlets. 33% of the limited number of skeletons studied showed vertebral osteoarthritis (compared to 50% in modern United States), and 12% showed extremity osteoarthritis (compared to 29% in modern U.S.) (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00026"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00026">24</a></span>). Agricultural societies were well distributed and there was trade and migration with other countries of the Near East. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00027"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00027">25</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49335-00003">
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00015"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00003"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00003">1</a></span> [176] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span>,</span> The World's Last Mysteries. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., Pleasantville, New York, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00016"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00004"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00002">2</a></span> [88] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">AWKES</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">ACQUETTA</span>,</span> (Editor), Atlas of Ancient Archaeology. (McGraw-Hill Book Co. New York, etc. 1974).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00017"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00005"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00004">3</a></span> [313] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">IPINSKY</span>, M<span class="lc-rw">ICHAEL</span>,</span> &#34;Camel Ancestry and Domestication in Egypt &#38; the Sahara&#34;, Archaeology 36, No. 3: 21-27, May/June, 1983.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00018"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00006"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00005">4</a></span> [315] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">AMBLIN</span>, Dora Jane,</span> &#34;Treasures of the Sands&#34;, Smithsonian, Sept. 1983, pp. 43-53.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00019"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00007"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00006">5</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00020"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00008"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00007">6</a></span> [88] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">AWKES</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">ACQUETTA</span>,</span> (Editor), Atlas of Ancient Archaeology. (McGraw-Hill Book Co. New York, etc. 1974).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00021"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00009"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00009">7</a></span> [295] <span class="sc-rw">Van Beek, Gus w.</span> &#34;Digging up Tell Jemmeh&#34;, Archaeology 36, Vol. 1: 12-19, Jan./Feb. 1983.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00022"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00010"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00010">8</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span>,</span> The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00023"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00011"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00011">9</a></span> [238] <span class="sc-rw">W<span class="lc-rw">OOLLEY</span>, Sir L<span class="lc-rw">EONARD</span>,</span> Excavations at Ur. (Barnes &#38; Noble, Inc., New York and Ernest Benn Limited, London, 1955).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00024"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00012"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00012">10</a></span> [95] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">EYERDAHL</span>, T<span class="lc-rw">HOR</span>,</span> Early Man and the Ocean. (Doubleday &#38; Co. Inc., Garden City, New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00025"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00013"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00013">11</a></span> [222] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">RAGER</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">AMES</span>,</span> The Peoples Chronology. (Holt, Rinehart &#38; Winston, New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00026"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00014"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00014">12</a></span> [211] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">ANNAHILL</span>, R<span class="lc-rw">EAY</span>,</span> Food in History. (Stein &#38; Day, New York 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00027"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00015"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00015">13</a></span> [95] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">EYERDAHL</span>, T<span class="lc-rw">HOR</span>,</span> Early Man and the Ocean. (Doubleday &#38; Co. Inc., Garden City, New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00028"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00016"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00016">14</a></span> [238] <span class="sc-rw">W<span class="lc-rw">OOLLEY</span>, Sir L<span class="lc-rw">EONARD</span>,</span> Excavations at Ur. (Barnes &#38; Noble, Inc., New York and Ernest Benn Limited, London, 1955).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00029"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00017"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00017">15</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span>,</span> The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00030"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00018"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00018">16</a></span> [194] <span class="sc-rw">S<span class="lc-rw">EVERY</span>, M<span class="lc-rw">ERLE</span>,</span> &#34;The Celts&#34;, National Geographic 151: 582-634, May 1977.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00031"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00019"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00019">17</a></span> [175] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span>,</span> The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00032"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00020"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00020">18</a></span> [213] <span class="sc-rw">T<span class="lc-rw">HOMAS</span>, Hugh,</span> A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00033"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00021"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00021">19</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span>,</span> The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00034"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00022"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00022">20</a></span> [21] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">RONOWSKI</span>, j.,</span> The Ascent of Man. (Little, Brown &#38; Co. Boston, Toronto, 1973).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00035"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00023"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00023">21</a></span> [45] <span class="sc-rw">D<span class="lc-rw">ANIEL</span>, Glyn</span> (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00036"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00024"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00024">22</a></span> [136] <span class="sc-rw">Mc<span class="lc-rw">EVEDY</span>, C<span class="lc-rw">OLIN</span>,</span> The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00037"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00025"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00025">23</a></span> [229] <span class="sc-rw">W<span class="lc-rw">ELLS</span>, h.c.,</span> An Outline of History. (Garden City Books, 1956).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00038"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00026"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00026">24</a></span> [4] <span class="sc-rw">A<span class="lc-rw">NGELL</span>, j. L<span class="lc-rw">AWRENCE</span>,</span> &#34;Osteoarthritis in Prehistoric Turkey and Medieval Byzantium&#34;, Henry Ford Hospital Journal 27: 38, 1979.
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49335-00039"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49335-00027"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49335-00027">25</a></span> [88] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">AWKES</span>, J<span class="lc-rw">ACQUETTA</span>,</span> (Editor), Atlas of Ancient Archaeology. (McGraw-Hill Book Co. New York, etc. 1974).
            </p>
      </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49335-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49335-00008"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-295"><a href="#num-footnote-1-295-back">1</a></span>. As noted in the previous chapter, Trager (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00013"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00013">11</a></span>) says that the wheel was invented much earlier, just after 6,500 B.C. in Sumeria
            </p>
        </div>
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49335-00002">
          <p id="rw-p_49335-00013"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-2-296"><a href="#num-footnote-2-296-back">2</a></span>. As for example, H.G. Wells, (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49335-00025"><a href="#rw-num-note_49335-00025">23</a></span>)
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


