<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Pacific: 5000 to 3000 B.C. &#160; &#160;</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49369-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49369-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49369-00001">The Pacific: 5000 to 3000 B.C. &#160; &#160;</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49369-00001">THE PACIFIC<b><br/></b></h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49369-00001">About 4,000 B.C. seas rose to their present level and the dingo was introduced to Australia perhaps by boat. The Australian small tool tradition, in archaeological terms, appeared on that continent. Mankind was in the Soloman Islands in Melanesia by about 3,000 B.C. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49369-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49369-00001">1</a></span>)<span class="ref-footnote-rw"><a href="#num-footnote-1-319" id="num-footnote-1-319-back">1</a></span></p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49369-00001"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49369-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49369-00001">1</a></span> [8] <span class="sc-rw">B<span class="lc-rw">ARRACLOUGH</span>, G<span class="lc-rw">EOFFREY</span></span> (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).
         </div>
      <div class="block-rw footnotes-rw">
        <div id="rw-block-footnotes_49369-00001">
          <p id="rw-p_49369-00002"><span class="num-footnote-rw" id="num-footnote-1-319"><a href="#num-footnote-1-319-back">1</a></span> The arguments go on about the origin and route of settlement of the Polynesian islands. Sinoto (Ref.300) has recently excavated an ancient sailing canoe on Huahine in the Society Islands group, and reports that this dates to 3000 B.C. His conclusion that this indicates that ancient mariners sailed from Asia to these islands is difficult to verify from his paper. He says that linguists are able to trace language roots of early Polynesian sailors back to a tongue spoken in Southeast Asia 5,000 years ago and that this is strongly supported by archaeological evidence of west to east movement. The actual "evidence" is not detailed. There is little doubt but what the Polynesian ancestors came from Southeast Asia, but their route to the eastern Pacific and the time schedule is still debatable. There is more about this argument in the main outline in the 4th century C.E. and after.
            </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


