<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>The Pacific: 100 B.C. to 0</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="body-rw Topic-rw" id="rw-body-Topic_49379-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49379-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49379-00001">The Pacific: 100 B.C. to 0</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49379-00001">THE PACIFIC</h2>
      <p class="fp-rw" id="rw-p_49379-00001">True Polynesians probably colonized the Hawaiin Islands less than 2,000 years ago but possibly in this first century before Christ. Similarly the Marquesas and Society Islands were possibly reached near the beginning of the Christian era but in the absence of more precise dating we shall postpone further discussion of this debatable issue until the 4th century. As indicated in previous chapters these islands were already inhabited either by an earlier wave across the northern Pacific from the New Guinea region or from America. Potsherds have been excavated in the Marquesas group and on islands near Fiji and they are of a South American not a Melanesian type. The cotton plant (the hybrid 26 chromosome type) from Mexico and Peru spread from the Galapagos Islands to Fiji but no farther.&#160;</p>
      <p id="rw-p_49379-00002">Shards of pottery have been found on the Galapagos off the South American coast dating to 2,000 years ago, but whether this means a permanent settlement or merely that some ships had taken temporary refuge there is unknown. (Ref. <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49379-00001"><a href="#rw-num-note_49379-00001">1</a></span>, <span class="ref-note-rw" id="rw-ref-note_49379-00002"><a href="#rw-num-note_49379-00002">2</a></span>)&#160;
         </p>
      <div class="block-rw list-notes-rw" id="rw-block-list-notes_49379-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49379-00004"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49379-00001"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49379-00001">1</a></span> [176] <span class="sc-rw">R<span class="lc-rw">EADERS</span> D<span class="lc-rw">IGEST</span></span>, The World's Last Mysteries. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., Pleasantville, New York, 1978).
            </p>
        <p id="rw-p_49379-00005"><span class="num-note-rw" id="rw-num-note_49379-00002"><a href="#rw-ref-note_49379-00002">2</a></span> [95] <span class="sc-rw">H<span class="lc-rw">EYERDAHL</span>, T<span class="lc-rw">HOR</span></span>, Early Man and the Ocean. (Doubleday &#038; Co. Inc., Garden City, New York, 1979).
            </p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


