<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
     <head>
        <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
        <title>BIBLIOGRAPHY</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/world-history.css" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    
<body>
  <div class="galley-rw">
    <div class="backmatter-rw Bibliography-rw" id="rw-backmatter-bibliography_49399-00001">
      <div class="title-block-rw" id="rw-title-block_49399-00001">
        <h1 id="rw-h1_49399-00001">BIBLIOGRAPHY</h1>
      </div>
      <h2 id="rw-h2_49399-00001">References</h2>
      <div class="block-rw list-references-rw" id="rw-block-list-references_49399-00001">
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00001">1. ABBOTT, SHIRLEY, The National Museum of American History, (Harry N. Abrahams, Inc. New York, 1981).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00002">2. ABERCROMBIE, THOMAS J., "The Sweep of Islam.", Great Religions of the World, (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00003">3. ALLISON, MARVIN J., "Studies of Pre-Columbian American Diseases 1971-1976, National Geographic Research Reports. Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 1-11 (National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., 1980). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00004">4. ANGELL, J. LAWRENCE, "Osteoarthritis in Prehistoric Turkey and Medieval Byzantium", Henry Ford Hospital Journal 27: 38, 1979. &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00005">5. ATIL, ESIN, "As bodyguards or rulers, Mamluks made a golden age.", Smithsonian 12: No. 4, pp.108-1131, July, 1981.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00006">6. AZZI, ROBERT, "Saudi Arabia: The Kingdom and its Power", National Geographic 158:286, Sept., 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00007">7. BALFOUR, MICHAEL, Stonehenge and its Mysteries, (Charles Scribners Sons, N.Y., 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00008">8. BARRACLOUGH, GEOFFREY (Editor), The Times Atlas of World History, (Hammond, Inc., Maplewood, New Jersey, 1978).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00009">9. BARTHEL, THOMAS S., "The Talking Boards of Easter Island", Scientific American, 236:116-133, March, 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00010">10. BELCHER, TAYLOR AND EDIE, "Great Golden Art of the Ancient Peruvian Artisans", Smithsonian 8:841, Dec. 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00011">11. BELL, I. WILEY, "Admiral Yi and the Turtle Boats", American History Illustrated X11:44-48, June, 1977 .</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00012">12. BERGAMINI, DAVID, Japan's Imperial Conspiracy" (Wm. Morrow &#38; Co., Inc., N.Y., 1971).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00013">13. BERGER, TENY, "Tulipomania was no Dutch treat to gambling burghers", Smithsonian 8:70-77, April, 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00014">14. BIEL, JORG, "Treasure from a Celtic Tomb", National Geographic 157:428, March 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00015">15. BOOKS AND MEDICINE, (Editors), M.D. Medical News Magazine, Vol. 3, No. 8, Aug. 1959.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00016">16. BOYD, WM. C., "Genetics and the Human Race", Science 140:1057-1064, June 7, 1963.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00017">17. BREFFNY, BRIAN DE, (Editor), The Irish World, (Harry N. Abrams, Inc. N.Y., 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00018">18. BRITISH MUSEUM, (Personal notes, 1978).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00019">19. BRITISH MUSEUM GUIDE, (British Museum Publications Limited, 6 Bedford Sq., London).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00020">20. BRODIE, FAWN M., Thomas Jefferson, An Intimate History", (W.W. Norton &#38; Co., Inc., New York).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00021">21. BRONOWSKI, J., The Ascent of Man. (Little, Brown &#38; Co. Boston, Toronto, 1973). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00022">22. CANBY, Thomas Y., "The Search for the First Americans", National Geographic Vol.155 No. 3, page 330, Sept. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00023">23. CASTELOT, ANDRE, King of Rome, (Translated from French by Robert Baldick), (Harper and Bros. Publishers, New York, 1960).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00024">24. CERRUTE, JAMES, "Belgium, One Nation Divisible", National Geographic 155:314, March, 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00025">25. CHAKRAVARTY, AMIYA, "Hinduism". Great Religions of the World, (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00026">26. CHAN, WING-TSIT, "The Orderly Realm of Chinese Sages". Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00027">27. CHAMBERS, JAMES, The Devil's Horsemen. (Atheneum, N.Y., 1979).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00028">28. CHEILIK, MICHAEL, Ancient History. (Barnes &#38; Noble Books of Harper &#38; Row New York et al, 1969).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00029">29. CHURCHILL, WINSTON, A History of the English Speaking Peoples. (Dodd, Mead &#38; Co., New York, 1956). Volume I - The Birth of Britain.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00030">30. CHURCHILL, WINSTON, Ibid., Volume II - The New World.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00031">31. CHURCHILL, WINSTON, Ibid., Volume III - The Age of Revolution.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00032">32. CHURCHILL, WINSTON, Ibid., Volume IV - The Great Democracies.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00033">33. CLARK, KENNETH, Civilization. (Harper &#38; Row, New York &#38; Evanston, 1969).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00034">34. CLARK, SIDNEY, All the Best in Scandinavia. (Dodd, Mead &#38; Co., New York, 1968).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00035">35. COBB, CHARLES E.,JR., "After Rhodesia, a Nation named Zimbabwe", National Geographic 160: 616-651, Nov. 1981).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00036">36. COE, MICHAEL D. "Archeological Linkage with North &#38; South America at La Victoria, Guatemala", American Anthropologist 62: 363-393, 1960.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00037">37. COLLINS, LARRY and LAPRERRE, DOMINIQUE, Freedom at Midnight. (Simon &#38; Schuster, New York, 1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00038">38. COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA, 3rd Edition. (Columbia University Press, New York and London, 1963).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00039">39. COOKE, ALESTAIR, America. (Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1977). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00040">40. COSTAIN, THOMAS B., The Three Edwards. (Doubleday &#38; Co., Inc., Garden City, New York, 1958). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00041">41. COTTERELL, ARTHUR, The Minoan World. (Chas. Scribner's Sons, N.Y., 1980). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00042">42. "CROSS AND CRESCENT, M.D. Medical Newsmagazine, Vol.3, No.3, March, 1959. &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00043">43. CUNLIFFE, BARRY, The Making of the English. (The Broadwater Press Ltd., Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, England).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00044">44. DALES, GEORGE F., "Strange Relics of the Crumbling, Still-puzzling Indus Culture", Smithsonian 89:56-65, July, 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00045">45. DANIEL, GLYN (Consulting Editor), Encyclopedia of Archeologv. (Thomas Y. Crowell Co. 10 East 53rd St., New York, 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00046">46. DURANT, WILL, The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part I - Our Oriental Heritage. (1954).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00047">47. DURANT, WILL, Ibid., Part II - The Life of Greece. (1939).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00048">48. DURANT, WILL, Ibid., Part III - Caesar and Christ. (1944).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00049">49. DURANT, WILL, Ibid., Part IV - The Age of Faith. (1950).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00050">50. DURANT, WILL, Ibid., Part V - The Renaissance. (1953).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00051">51. DURANT, WILL, Ibid., Part VI - The Reformation. (1957).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00052">52. DURANT, WILL and ARIEL, The Story of Civilization. (Simon and Schuster, New York). Part VII - The Age of Reason Begins. (1961). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00053">53. DURANT, WILL and ARIEL, Ibid., Part VIII - The Age of Louis XIV. (1963).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00054">54. DURANT, WILL and ARIEL, Ibid., Part IX - The Age of Voltaire. (1965).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00055">55. DURANT, WILL and ARIEL, Ibid. Part XI - The Age of Napoleon. (1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00056">56. DYSON, FREEMAN, Disturbing the Universe. (Harper and Row, N.Y., 1979).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00057">57. EASTON, STEWART C. The Heritage of the Past. (Alternate Edition). (Rinehart &#38; Co., Inc. New York, 1957.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00058">58. EDWARDS, MIKE, "Tunisia: Sea, Sand, Success", National Geographic 157: 184, Feb. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00059">59. EL-BAZ, FAROUK, "Desert Builders Knew a Good Thing when they saw it", Smithsonian April, 1981, pages 116-121.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00060">60. ELIOT, JOHN L., "Treasures of Dresden", National Geographic 154: No. 5, Page 702, Nov. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00061">61. ENCYLOPEDIA BRITANNICA, (Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc., Wm. Benton, Publ.).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00062">62. ENGEL, FREDERIC ANDRE, An Ancient World Preserved. (Translated by Rachel Kendall Gordon). (Crown Publishers, Inc., N.Y., 1976).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00063">63. FALCONER, THOMAS, Discovery of the Mississippi. (London, 1844 - as reprinted by Shoal Creek Publishers, Inc. Austin, Texas, 1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00064">64. FARB, PETER, Man's Rise to Civilization. (E.P. Dutton &#38; Co., New York, 1968).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00065">65. FELL, BARRY, America B.C. (Quadrangle - The New York Times Book Co., 1976).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00066">66. FELL, BARRY, Saga America. (Times Books, New York, 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00067">67. FITZHUGH, WM. W., "Excavations at Rattlers Bight - A Late Maritime Archaic Settlement and Cemetery in Hamilton Inlet, Labrador." National Geographic Research Reports Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 287-304. (Publishers National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00068">68. GARRATY, JOHN A. and GAY, PETER, (Editors), The Columbia History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, New York, 1972).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00069">69. GARRETT, W.E., "China's Beauty Spot", National Geographic 156: 536, Oct. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00070">70. GARTHWAITE, G.R., "The Bakhtiyari Tribe: Its Organization and Role in Iran". National Geographic Societv Research Reports Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 257-266. (National Geographic Society Publications, 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00071">71. GEARY, DOROTHY, "Mighty Tamerlane became Master of Half the World", Smithsonian Sept. 1979, page 89.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00072">72. GIBBONS, BOYD, "The Bulgarians", National Geographic 158: 91, July, 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00073">73. GORE, RICK, "Journey to China's Far West", National Geographic 157: 292, March 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00074">74. GRAMONT, SANCHE DE, The French, Portrait of a People. (G.E. Putnam 's Sons~ New York, 1969).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00075">75. GRANT, MICHAEL, The Etruscans. (Chas. Scribner's Sons, New York, 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00076">76. GRATTAN, C. HARTLEY, The Southwest Pacific to 1900. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1963).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00077">77. "GREEK MEDICINE", (Epic of Medicine Series, M.D. Newsmagazine, Vol. 3, No. 9, Sept. 1959).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00078">78. GREEMAN, E.F. Discussion of paper of Ronal J. Mason, Current Anthropology, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 252-254, 1962.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00079">79. GREEN, MAUREEN, "A tough people in a tough time, the Vikings also had a gentler side", Smithsonian, Sept., 1980, page 60.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00080">80. GROVE, DAVID C., "Olmec Origins and Transpacific Diffusion: Reply to Meggers", American Anthropology 78: 634-637, 1976.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00081">81. GROVE, DAVID C., "Archeological Investigations at Chalcatzingo, 1972, 1973." National Geographic Reports Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 287-304, (National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00082">82. GROVE, NOEL, "North Yemen", National Geographic 156: 244, Aug. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00083">83. HALLETT ROBIN, Africa to 1875. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00084">84. HAMBLIN, DORA JANE, "Carthage must be destroyed' It was but now it is reappearing", Smithsonian 9: 442, Feb. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00085">85. HAMMOND, NORMAN, "The Earliest Maya", Scientific American 236: 116-133, Mar. 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00086">86. HANSEN, JAMES, "Knights of Malta, mini-nation based on Chivalry", Smithsonian 12: 112-127, Jan. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00087">87. HAWKES, JACQUETTA, The World of the Past. (Two volumes). (Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1927.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00088">88. HAWKES, JACQUETTA, (Editor), Atlas of Ancient Archaeology. (McGraw-Hill Book Co. New York, etc. 1974).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00089">89. HEARN, MAXWELL, "An Ancient Chinese Army rises from Underground Sentinel duty", Smithsonian, Nov. 1979, page 39.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00090">90. HEIZER, Robert F., "Source of the Colossi of Memnon of the Theben Plain, Egypt, National Geographic Society Research Reports Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 287-304. (National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00091">91. HERM, GERHARD, The Celts. (English Translation by Weidenfeld and Nicholson Ltd.), (St. Martin's Press, New York 1976).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00092">92. HERODOTUS, The Persian Wars. (Translated by George Rawlinson). (Random House, Inc., 1942).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00093">93. HESS, BILL, "The White Mountain Apache: Seeking the Best of Two Worlds", National Geographic 157: 218, Feb. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00094">94. HEYERDAHL, THOR, "Tigris sails into the Past, National Geographic 154: 730, Dec. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00095">95. HEYERDAHL, THOR, Early Man and the Ocean. (Doubleday &#38; Co. Inc., Garden City, New York, 1979).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00096">96. HEYERDAHL, THOR, Aku-Aku, The secret of Easter Island. (Chicago, 1958).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00097">97. HISTORICAL ATLAS OF THE WORLD. Barnes and Noble Books. (Harper &#38; Row, New York et al, 1972).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00098">98. HOPKINS, TOM, South Africa. (Time, Inc. New York, 1964).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00099">99. HOYLE, FRED, On Stonehenge. (W. F. Freemon &#38; Co., San Francisco, 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00100">100. HSU, KENNETH J., "When the Black Sea was Drained," Scientific American, 238: 53-63, May, 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00101">101. HUCKER, CHARLES O., China's Imperial Past. (Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00102">102. HUME, IVOR NOEL, "First look at a Lost Virginia Settlement," National Geographic. June, 1979, page 735.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00103">103. HUME, IVOR NOEL, "New Clues to an Old Mystery", National Geographic 161: 53-77, Jan. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00104">104. HUNT, CARLA, "Berber Brides' Fair", National Geographic 157: 119, Jan. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00105">105. HYMAN, RANDALL, - "Fiery Images of Continental Drift", Smithsonian 12: 52-63, Jan. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00106">106. JONES, ROBERT A., "State's Past Being Sacrificed in Rush to Future", Los Angeles Times, Oct. 1975.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00107">107. JORDON, ROBERT PAUL, "The Proud Armenians", National Geographic 153: 846, June 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00108">108. JORDON, ROBERT PAUL. "Sri Lanka", National Geographic 155: 123, Jan. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00109">109. JUDGE, JOSEPH, "Minoans and Mycenaens: Greece's Brilliant Bronze Age", National Geographic 153: 142, Feb. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00110">110. JUDGE, JOSEPH, The Travail of Ireland", National Geographic 1159: 432-441, Apr. 1981.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00111">111. KEDDI, NIKKI R., Roots of Revolution. (Yale University Press, 1981).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00112">112. KEITH, DONALD H., "A 14th Century Cargo Makes Port at Last", National Geographic 156: 231, Aug. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00113">113. KIM, H. EDWARDS, "Seoul: Korean Showcase", National Geographic 156: 770, Dec. 1979.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00114">114. KITAGAWA, JOSEPH M., "The Eightfold Path to Nirvana", Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00115">115. KUH, MICHAEL, "Saffron Roles in Gilded Thailand", Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00116">116. LAMB HAROLD, Genghis Khan. (Robert M. McBride &#38; Co., New York 1927).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00117">117. LA FAY, HOWARD, "Ebla, Splendor of an Unknown Empire", National Geographic 154: 730, Dec. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00118">118. FAY, HOWARD, "Syria", National Geographic 157: 485-511, Apr. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00119">119. LANGER,WM. L. (Editor), Encylopedia of World History. (Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1952.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00120">120. &#160;LAURING, PALLE, A History of Denmark. (Host &#38; Son, Copenhagen 1960).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00121">121. &#160;LEONARDO DA VINCI. (Reynal &#38; Co. New York, 1956).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00122">122. &#160;LEWINSOHN, RICHARD, Animals, Men and Myths. (Translated from German). (Harper &#38; Brothers, New York 1954).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00123">123. &#160;LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, "Documents Illustrative of the Formation of the Union of the American States, Government Printing Office, Washington D.C. 1927.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00124">124. &#160;LOW, D.M. (Editor). Abridgement of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, by EDWARD GIBBON. (Harcourt, Brace &#38; Co., New York 1960).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00125">125. &#160;LYONS, ALBERT S., M.D. AND PETRUCELLI, R. JOSEPH, M.D., Medicine - An Illustrated History. (Harry N. Abrams, Inc. New York 1978).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00126">126. &#160;MACARTNEY, C.S., Hungary. A Short History. (Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago 1962).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00127">127. MAENCHEN-HELFEN, OTTO J., The World of the Huns. (Edited by Max Knight and background by Paul Alexander), University of California Press, Berkeley 1973).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00128">128. MAREK, GEORGE R., The Eagles Die. (Harper &#38; Row, New York, 1974).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00129">129. MARINATOS, SPYRIDON, "Thera, Key to the Riddle of Minos", National Geographic 141: No. 5, page 702, May, 1972.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00130">130. MARSHACK, ALEXANDER, The Roots of Civilization. (McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1972).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00131">131. MASSIE, ROBERT K., Peter the Great. (Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00132">132. MASON, RONAL J., "The Paleo-Indian Tradition in Eastern North America", Current Anthropology 3, No. 33: 227-252, 1962.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00133">133. MATTINGLY, GARRETT, The Armada. (The Riverside Press, Cambridge: Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston 1959).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00134">134. MAY, CHARLES Paul, Oceania: Polynesia, Melanesia, Micronesia. (Thomas Nelson, Inc., Nashville, Tenn. 1973).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00135">135. MAZOUR, ANATOLE G., Russia, Tsarist and Communist. (D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc. Princeton, New Jersey 1963).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00136">136. McEVEDY, COLIN, The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History. (Fletcher &#38; Son Ltd., Norwich, England 1967).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00137">137. McEVEDY, COLIN, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. (Rupert Hart-Davis and Crowell-Collier, U.S.A. 1978).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00138">138. McDOWELL, BART, "The Aztecs", National Geographic 158: Dec. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00139">139. McNEILL, WILLIAM H., The Rise of the West. (The University of Chicago Press, 1963).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00140">140. McNEILL, WILLIAM H., Plagues and Peoples. (Anchor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, New York 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00141">141. MEGGERS, BETTY J., "The Transpacific Origin of Meso American Civilization: A Preliminary Review of the Evidence and its theoretical Implications", American Anthropologist 77: 1-271, 1975.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00142">142. MEGGERS, BETTY J., "Yes if by Land, No if by Sea: The Double Standard in Interpreting Cultural Similarities", American Anthropologist 78: 637, 1976.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00143">143. MENOZZIL, P., PIAZZA, L. AND CAVELLI-SFORZA, L., "Synthetic Maps of Human Gene Frequencies in Europeans", Science 201: 789-7921, Sept. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00144">144. MICHAUD, ROLAND AND SABRINA, "Afghanistan: A Record of a Timeless Culture now threatened with change", Smithsonian, Nov. 1980, page 48.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00145">145. MIDDLETON, DREW, "History Supports Poland", Syndicated column in Dallas Morning New, Jan. 25, 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00146">146. MILTON, RENE, "Teotihuacán", Scientific American, June 1967, page 38.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00147">147. MITFORD, NANCY, The Sun King. (Harper &#38; Row, New York, 1966).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00148">148. MOCTEZUMA, EDUARDO MATOS, "New Finds in the Great Temple", National Geographic 158: Dec. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00149">149. MOLINA MONTEZ, Augusto F., "The Building of Tenochtitlan", National Geographic 158: Dec. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00150">150. MORRISON, SAMUEL ELLIOT, Admiral of the Ocean Sea. A Life of ChristopherColumbus. (Little, Brown &#38; Co., Boston 1942).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00151">151. MORRISON, SAMUEL ELLIOT, The Oxford History of the American People, Oxford Press, N.Y., 1965.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00152">152. MUCKROSS ABBEY, Killarney, Ireland. Personal material obtained 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00153">153. NANCE, JOHN, The Gentle Tasaday. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., New York 1975.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00154">154. NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY, "Africa: Its Political Development", Cartographic Division, National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C., Feb. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00155">155. NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY, "Archeological Map of Middle America, Ibid. Oct. 1968.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00156">156. NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY, Atlas of the World. 5th Edition. (National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., 1981.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00157">157. NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY, "Demons and Lamas in the High Himalayas", Great Religions of the World, National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00158">158. NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY, "Early Civilizations in the Middle East. Map from Cartographic Division, National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., Sept. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00159">159. OETTINGER, MARION JR. AND PARSONS, PATRICIA AMANDA, "The Tlapanec Indians of Tlacoapa, Guerro, Mexico", National Geo~raphic Research Reports, 12: 517-528, 1971. (Published by the National Geographic Society, Washington D.C. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00160">160. OXENSTIERNA, ERIC, "The Vikings", Scientific American, May 1967.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00161">161. OZGUC, TAHSIN, "Ancient Ararat", Scientific American, Mar. 1967, page 44.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00162">162. PAGE, JAMES K., JR., "Phenomena, Comment and Notes, Smithsonian 8: 15-16. Summer, 1976.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00163">163. PAGELS, ELAINE, The Gnostic Gospels. (Random House, New York 1979).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00164">164. PAINTIN, ELAINE, "Radio-carbon Dating and the Archeologist", Pamphlet published by the Trustees of the British Museum, 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00165">165. PALMER, ROSE A., The North American Indians. (Vol. IV Smithsonian Instruction Series, The Series Publishers, Inc., New York 1949).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00166">166. PARKES, HENRY BAMFORD, A History of Mexico. (Houghton Miff lin Co., Boston. The Riverside Press, Cambridge).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00167">167. PARSON, JAMES J. AND DENEVEN, WILLIAM M., "Pre-Columbian Ridged Fields", Scientific American July, 1967, page 93.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00168">168. PEI, MARIO. The Story of Language. (Revised Edition). (J.P. Lippincott Co., Philadelphia &#38; New York 1962.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00169">169. POLLITZER, WILLIAM S., "Blood Groups and Anthropology", Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences Vol. I: 193, 1970.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00170">170. PREBBEL, JOHN, The Lion in the North: One Thousand Years of Scotland's History. (Secker &#38; Warburg, London, 1971).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00171">171. PRIDEAUX, TOM, "Rich &#38; Rugged Thracian life seen in a Glittering Show", Smithsonian 8: 42-51, June 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00172">172. PUTMAN, JOHN J., "Down the Teeming Ganges, Holy River of India, Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00173">173. RAMSEY L.G.G., The Complete Encyclopedia of Antiques. (Hawthorn Books, Inc., New York, 1962).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00174">174. RANG, MERCER, Anthology of Orthopedics. (Chas. Livingtone, Edinburgh, London &#38; New York, 1966).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00175">175. READERS DIGEST, The Last Two Million Years. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., London New York, etc. 1973).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00176">176. READERS DIGEST, The World's Last Mysteries. (Readers Digest Assoc., Inc., Pleasantville, New York, 1978).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00177">177. REINHARDT. KURT F., Germany: 2000 Years. (Frederick ~ngar Publishing Co., New York, 1960).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00178">178. RENFREW, COLIN, "Ancient Europe is Older than we Thought", National Geographic 152: 615, Nov. 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00179">179. RENFREW, COLIN, "Ancient Bulgaria's Golden Treasures", National Geographic 158: 112, July, 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00180">180. RICE, DAVID TALBOT, (Editor), The Dawn of European Civilization. (McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York 1965).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00181">181. RICKETT, RICHARD, A Brief Survey of Austrian History. (Georg Prachner Verlag, Wien, Third Edition, 1970).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00182">182. RIPLEY, S. DILLON, "Tibet: the high &#38; fragile land behind the ranges", Smithsonian Jan. 1981, pp. 97-105.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00183">183. ROCKEFELLER (NELSON) COLLECTION. (The Nelson Rockefeller Collection, Inc., New York, 1978).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00184">184. RODES, JOHN E., Germany: A History. (Holt, Rinehart &#38; Wilson, New York 1964).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00185">185. ROMAN MEDICINE, in Epic of Medicine Series, M.D. Medical Newsmagazine, 3: No. 8, Aug. 1959.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00186">186. SAKELLARAKIS, YANNIS AND SAPOUNA-SAKELLARAKI, EFI, "Drama of Death in a Minoan Temple", National Geographic 159: 205-222, Feb. 1981.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00187">187. SANTA CATALINA ISLAND, Pamphlet by Santa Catalina Island Co., Avalon, Calif.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00188">188. SAVILLE, CURTIS &#38; KATHLEEN, "They row, row, row their boat across the Atlantic Ocean", Smithsonian, Oct. 1981, pp. 192-215.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00189">189. SCHLEDERMANN, PETER, "Eskimo and Viking Finds in the High Arctic", National Geographic 159: 575-602, May 1981.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00190">190. SCHOMP, GERALD, "St. Brendan's Fantastic Voyage", American History Illustrated XII: 22-27, Apr. 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00191">191. SCHWARTZ, GEORGE AND BISHOP, PHILIP W., Moments of Discovery. Vol. I - The Origins of Science. (Basic Books, Inc., New York 1958).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00192">192. SCHWARTZ, GEORGE AND BISHOP, PHILIP W., Ibid. Volume II - The Development of Modern Science.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00193">193. SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, "Science and the Citizen" section, 238: 92-96, May 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00194">194. SEVERY, MERLE, "The Celts", National Geographic 151: 582-634, May 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00195">195. SMITH, GARY AND LONG, MICHAEL E., "Utah's Rock Art: Wilderness Louvre", National Geographic 157: 971, Jan. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00196">196. SMITH, RHEA MARSH, Spain, A Modern History. (The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1970).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00197">197. SOUTHGATE, M. THERESE, "Explanation of Cover - Rhyton with Kneeling Bull", Journal of the American Medical Association 239: vol. 1, page 4.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00198">198. (The) SPANISH WEST, by Editors of Time-life Books. (Time-Life Books, New York, 1976).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00199">199. STARR, S. FREDERICK, "Why did Russia let Seward's folly go on the cheap?" Smithsonian, Dec. 1979, page 129.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00200">200. STATLER, OLIVER, "Pilgrims' Path in Buddhist Japan", Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00201">201. STATLER, OLIVER, " Zen's Disciplined Way to Sudden Light", Great Religions of the World. (National Geographic Society, 1978 Edition).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00202">202. STEIN, JESS, (Editor-in-chief), The Random House Dictionary of the English Language. (Random House, New York, 1966).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00203">203. STEPHENS, JOHN L., Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas and Yucatan. (Dover Publ., Inc., New York, 1969 - Re-publication of original published in 1841 by Harper and Brothers).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00204">204. STEPHENS, JOHN L., Incidents of Travel in Yucatan, Volume I. (Dover Publ., Inc. New York, 1963 - unabridged re-publication of 1843 work by Harper &#38; Bros.).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00205">205. STEPHENS, JOHN L., Ibid. Volume II.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00206">206. STILLMAN EDMUND AND EDITORS OF LIFE, The Balkans. (Time, Inc., New York, 1964).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00207">207. STOKES, JOHN F.D., "Spaniards &#38; the Sweet Potato in Hawaii &#38; Hawaiian American Contacts", American Anthropologist 34: 594, 1932.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00208">208. SULLIVAN, LOUIS R., "Race Types in Polynesia", American Anthropologist Vol. XXVI, No. 1, 1924.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00209">209. SWANSON, EARL H; BRAY, WARWICK; FARRINGTON, IAN, The New World. (E.P. Dutton &#38; Co., Inc., New York, 1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00210">210. TAMARIN, ALFRED AND GLUBOK, SHIRLEY, Ancient Indians of the Southwest. (Doubleday &#38; Co., Inc. Garden City, New York 1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00211">211. TANNAHILL, REAY, Food in History. (Stein &#38; Day, New York 1973).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00212">212. TANNER, OGDEN, The Canadians. (Time-Life Books Inc., Alexandria, Va. 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00213">213. THOMAS, HUGH, A History of the World. (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1979).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00214">214. THOMSON, DANIEL, "The Ebb &#38; Flow of Infection", Journal of the American Medical Assoc. 235: Vol. 3, page 269, Jan 19, 1976).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00215">215. THORDNDIKE, JOSEPH J., JR., (Editor). Mysteries of the Past. (American Heritage Publishing Co., Inc. New York, 1977, distributed by Simon &#38; Schuster, N.Y.).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00216">216. THUCYDIDES, The Peloponnesian War. (Translated by John H. Finley, Jr.). (Random House, Inc., New York 1951).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00217">217. de TOCQUEVILLE, ALEXIS, Democracy in America. Volume I, Phillips Bradley Edition, correcting original Henry Reeve Translation of 1835. (Alfred A. Knopf, New York 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00218">218. de TOCQUEVILLE, ALEX15, Ibid. Volume II. (Original publication in 1840).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00219">219. TOPPING, AUDREY, "China's Incredible Find", National Geographic 153: 440, Apr. 1978.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00220">220. TOYNBEE, ARNOLD J., A Study of History. An abridgement in two volumes by D.C. Somervell. (Oxford University Press, New York &#38; London, 1957).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00221">221. TOYNBEE, ARNOLD J., Change and Habit. (Oxford University Press, New York &#38; London, 1966).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00222">222. TRAGER, JAMES, The Peoples Chronology. (Holt, Rinehart &#38; Winston, New York, 1979).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00223">223. UNDERWOOD, E. THURSTON, "The Mimbrenos: Masters of the Pottery Art", Southwest Heritage 6: 15-161, Summer, 1976.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00224">224. VAN ANDEL, TJEERD, Tales of an Old Ocean. (The Portable Stanford, Stanford Alumni Assoc., Stanford, Calif. 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00225">225. VESILIND, PRIT J. "Return to Estonia", National Geographic 157: 485-511, Apr. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00226">226. WAECHTER, JOHN, Prehistoric Man. (Octopus Books Limited, London and Mandarin Publishers Limited, Hong Kong, 1977).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00227">227. WALDREN, WM. H., "Investigation of Cave Deposits of Quarternary and Holocene Origin: The Muleta Expedition", National Geographic Society Research Reports, Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 731-745. (National Geographic Society, Washington D.C. 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00228">228. WARD, FRED, "In Long-Forbidden Tibet", National Geographic 157: 218, Feb. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00229">229. WELLS, H.C., An Outline of History. (Garden City Books, 1956).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00230">230.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00231">231. WENTE, EDWARD F., "Tutankhamun and his World", Treasures of Tutankhamun. (The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1976).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00232">232. WERNICK, ROBERT, "M. de Tallyrand, a controversial Prince of Politics", Smithsonian Nov. 1981, pp. 74-83.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00233">233. WHEAT, JOE BEN, "A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill", Scientific American, Jan. 1967, page 44.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00234">234. WHEELER, KEITH, The Alaskans. (Time-Life Books, Alexandria, Va. 1977). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00235">235. WICHITA FALLS TIMES, Wichita Falls, Texas, Apr. 29, 1977.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00236">236. WILKERSON, JEFFREY K. "Man's Eighty Centuries in Veracruz", National Geographic 158: 202, Aug. 1980.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00237">237. WILSON, DAVID, The Vikings and their Origins. (Thames and Hudson, London, 1970).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00238">238. WOOLLEY, SIR LEONARD, Excavations at Ur. (Barnes &#38; Noble, Inc., New York and Ernest Benn Limited, London, 1955).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00239">239. WORLEY, IAN A., "Ancient Environments &#38; Age of Non-glaciated Terrain in Southeastern Alaska", National Geographic Research Reports, Vol. 12, 1971 Projects, pp. 731-732. (Publ. National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00240">240. WORLD BOOK ENCYLOPEDIA. (Field Enterprises, Inc., Chicago 1950).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00241">241. ZIMMERMAN, LARRY J. AND WHITTEN, RICHARD G., "Prehistoric bones tell a grim tale of Indian vs. Indian", Smithsonian, Sept. 1980, page 100.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00242">242. PEFFER, NATHANIAL, The Far East. (Univ. of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1958).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00243">243. EL-BAZ, FAROUK, "Egypt's desert of Promise", National Geographic 161: 190-221, Feb. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00244">244. MALONEY, STEPHANIE J., "The Medieval Fortress of Mietlica in Poland", Archeology 35: 26-32, Mar./Apr. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00245">245. DETHLEFSEN, EDWIN, ET AL, "Archeology on St. Eustatius: The Pompeii of the New World", Archeology 35: 8-15, Mar./Apr. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00246">246. BIANCHI, ROBERT S., "Egyptian Mummies: Myth and Reality", Archeology 35: 18-25, Mar./Apr. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00247">247. WINN, MICHAEL, "Following the trail of Marco Polo across the roof of Central Asia", Smithsonian 13: No. 1, pp. 46-55, Apr. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00248">248. CHELMINSKI, RUDOLF, "The plot to murder Napoleon:, Smithsonian 13: No. 1, pp. 76-87, Apr. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00249">249. FINLEY, M.I., Ancient Slavery &#38; Modern Ideology. (The Viking Press, New York, 1980).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00250">250. GILLINGHAM, JOHN, The Wars of the Roses. (Louisiana State University, 1981).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00251">251. BEDAUX, ROGIER M.A., "Rediscoverring the Tellem of Mali", Archeology 35: No. 3, pp. 28-34, May/June 1982. &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00252">252. FLEMING, STUART, "Chaco Canyon: Mystery of the Pueblos", Archaeology 35: No. 3 37-38, May/June 1982. &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00253">253. BECKER, MARSHALL J., "Search for the Lenape Indians", Archeology 35: No. 3, 10-19, May/June, 1982. &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00254">254. CAPUTO, ROBERT, "Sudan: Arab-African Giant", National Geographic 161: 346-379, Mar. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00255">255. ARCHEOLOGY OF SOUTH AMERICA, Cartographic Division, National Geographic Society, March 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00256">256. INDIANS OF SOUTH AMERICA, Cartographic Division, National Geographic Society, March 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00257">257. LEVY, JANET E., The Bronze Age Hoards of Denmark", Archeology 35: No. 1, pp. 37-45, Jan/Feb. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00258">258. SEARS, W.H., "Food Production &#38; Village Life in Prehistoric Southeastern United States", Archaeology 24: 322-329, Oct. 1971.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00259">259. MAC NEISH, RICHARD STOCKTON, "Food Production &#38; Village Life Developed in the Tehuacan Valley, Mexico", Archaeology 24: 307-315, Oct. 1971.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00260">260. BRAUDEL, FERNAND, Civilization ~ Capitalism - Volume I, The Structures of Everyday Life. (Translated from French by Sian Reynolds). (Harper ~ Row, Publishers, New York, 1981.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00261">261. PULESTON, DENNIS E. AND PULESTON, OLGA STAVRAKIS, "An Ecological Approach to the Origins of Maya Civilizations", Archaeology 24: 330-3371, Oct. 1971.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00262">262. WARNER, ROBERT, "Thailand hosts a birthday party", Smithsonian, Vol. 13, No. 3: 34-45, June, 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00263">263. HAMMOND, NORMAN, "Unearthing the Oldest Known Maya", National Geographic 162: 126- 140, July 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00264">264. FREIDEL, DAVID; ROBERTSON, ROBIN; AND CLIFF, MAYNARD B., "The Maya City of Cerros", Archaeology Vol. 355, No. 4: 12-211, July/Aug. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00265">265. SNARSKIS, MICHAEL J., "The Pre-Columbian Art of Costa Rica", Archaeology Vol. 35, No 1: 54-581, Jan./Feb. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00266">266. de SAPIR, OLGA LINARES AND RANERE, ANTHONY J., "Human Adaptation to the Tropical Forests of Western Panama", Archaeology 24: 346-355, Oct. 1971.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00267">267. WRIGHT, J. LEITCH, JR., The Only Land they Knew. (The Free Press, New York, 1981).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00268">268. McINTOSH, SUSAN &#38; RODERICK, "Finding West Africa's Oldest City", National Geographic 162: 396-417, Sept. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00269">269. McQUIRE, RANDALL AND SCHIFFER, MICHAEL B., "On the Threshold of Civilization: The Hohokam of Arizona", Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 22-29, Sept./Oct. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00270">270. BUTZER, KARL W., "Empires, Capitals and Landscapes of Ancient Ethiopia", Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 30-37, Sept./Oct. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00271">271. ANDERSON, ROBERT D., "Qasr Ibrim: Watchdog of the Nile", Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 58-60, Sept./Oct. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00272">272. TONG, ENZHENG; LENG, JIAN AND WANGDUI, SUOLANG, "Unraveling Tibetan Prehistory at Karuo", Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 62, Sept./Oct. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00273">273. ANAWALT, PATRICIA R. "Understanding Aztec Human Sacrifice", Archaeology Vol. 35, No. 5: 38-45, Sept./Oct. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00274">274. BENCHLEY, PETER, "The Bahamas", National Geographic 162: 365-395, Sept. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00275">275. FISHER, ROBERT E., "The Stone Temples of Kashmir", Archaeology 35, No. 4: 47-53, July/ Aug. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00276">276. EVERINGHAM, JOHN, "Thailand's Working Royalty", National Geographic 162:468-498, Oct. 1892.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00277">277. CANBY, THOMAS Y, "The Anasazi: Riddles in the Ruins", National Geographic 162: 562-592, Nov. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00278">278. MOZAI, TORAO, "The Lost Fleet of Kublai Khan", National Geographic 162: 635-649, Nov. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00279">279. McNEILL, WILLIAM H., The Pursuit of Power. (University of Chicago Press, 1982).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00280">280. BUTTERFIELD, FOX, China. Alive in the Bitter Sea. (Times Books).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00281">281. GORE, RICK, "The Mediterranean: Sea of Man's Fate", National Geographic 162: 694-737, Dec. 1982.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00282">282. PEKARIK, ANDREW J., "The Cave Temples of Dunbruang", Archaeology 36, Vol. 1: 20-27, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00283">283. NATIONS, HAMES D. AND CLARK, JOHN E., "The Bows and Arrows of the Lacandon Maya", Archaeology 36, Vol. I: 36-43, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00284">284. HATCH, JAMES W. AND GEIDEL, RICHARD A., "Tracing Status and Diet in Prehistoric Tennessee", Archaeology 36, Vol. I: 56-59, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00285">285. KERSHAW, NORMA, "Journey to the Caves of China", Archaeology 36, Vol. I: 66-69, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00286">286. MORTON, W. BROWN, III, "Indonesia Rescues Ancient Borobudur", National Geographic 163: 126-142, Jan. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00287">287. "NAPOLEON'S DEATH: ARSENIC &#38; OLD WALLPAPER", Currents section, page 6, Science 83, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00288">288. "PEOPLES OF THE ARCTIC", Cartographic Division, National Geographic, Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00289">289. TUCKER, WILLIAM, "Thrifty Diabetes", Science 83, Apr. 1983, pp. 92-93.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00290">290. CASEY, HARRY, "Desert Intaglios", Science 83, Apr. 1983, pp. 50-54.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00291">291. RIDLEY, JASPER, Statesman &#38; Saint. (The Viking Press, New York, 1982).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00292">292. BRAUDEL, FERNAND, Civilization &#38; Capitalism - Volume II, The Wheels of Commerce. (English translation by Sian Reynolds), (Harper &#38; Row, Publ., New York, 1982).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00293">293. EDMUNDS, R. DAVID, The Shawnee Prophet. (University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London, 1938).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00294">294. CAPPS, BENJAMIN, The Great Chiefs. (Time-Life Books, New York, 1975).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00295">295. VAN BEEK, GUS W. "Digging up Tell Jemmeh", Archaeology 36, Vol. 1: 12-19, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00296">296. WHITE, JOYCE C. "Ban Chiang: Discovery of a Lost Bronze Age", Archaeology 36, No.1:52-55, Jan./Feb. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00297">297. PFEIFFER, JOHN, "At Ban Chiang a lost civilization comes to light", Smithsonian, Jan. 1933, pp. 98-107.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00298">298. HANNERS, DAVID, "Archaeological find alters conceptions of early Indian life", Dallas Morning News, Feb. 20, 1983, pp. 1 &#38; 2 AA.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00299">299. ANATI, EMMANUEL, "Saving the World's Rock Art", Archaeology 36, No.2: 24-30, Mar./Apr. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00300">300. SINSTO, YOSIHIKO H., "The Huahine Excavation: Discovery of an Ancient Polynesian Canoe", Archaeology 36, No.2: 10-15, Mar./Apr. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00301">301. SAWYER P.H., Kings &#38; Vikings A.D, 700-1100. (Methuen, London &#38; New York, 1982).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00302">302. WARNER, OLIVER (with DR. J.C. BEAGLEHOLE), Captain Cook and the South Pacific. (Cassell, London. American Heritage Publ. Co., Inc., New York, 1963).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00303">303. BONNET, CHARLES, "Kerma: An African Kingdom of 2nd and 3rd Millennia, B.C., Archaeology 36, No.6: 38-45, Nov./Dec. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00304">304. HESTER, THOMAS R.; SHAFER, HARRY J., ET AL, "Colhas's Stone Tool Industry", Archaeology 36, No.6: 46-52, Nov./Dec. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00305">305. FOCKLER, SHIRLEY, "Kyongju", Travel Holiday, Sept. 1981, page 41.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00306">306. KAO, JEFFREY AND ZUOSHENG, YANG, "On Jade Suits &#38; Han Archeology", Archaeology 36, No.6: 30-37, Nov./Dec. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00307">307. FLEMING, STUART, "Gallic Water Power: The mills of Barbegal", Archaeology 36, No.6: 68, Nov./Dec. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00308">308. EDWARDS, MIKE, "Honduras: The Eye of the Storm", National Geographic 164: No.5: 608-637, Nov. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00309">309. THE MAKING OF AMERICA: HAWAII, Cartographic Division of National Geographic Society, Washington D.C., Nov. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00310">310. MORGAN LAEL, "Alaska's Far Out Islands: The Aleutians", National Geographic 164, No. 3: 336-363, Sept. 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00311">311. CAPUTO, ROBERT, "Ethiopia: Revolution in an Ancient Empire", National Geographic 163, No. 5: 614- 644, May 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00312">312. PATTERSON, CAROLYN BENNETT, "A Walk and Ride on the Wild Side", National Geographic 163, No. 5: 676-693, May 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00313">313. RIPINSKY, MICHAEL, "Camel Ancestry and Domestication in Egypt &#38; the Sahara", Archaeology 36, No. 3: 21-27, May/June, 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00314">314. SANGRAW, CLARENCE, "Treasures from Shanghai", Archaeology 361, No.3: 60-63, May/June, 1983.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00315">315. HAMBLIN, DORA JANE, "Treasures of the Sands", Smithsonian, Sept. 1983, pp. 43-53.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00316">316. HOFFMAN, MICHAEL ALLEN, "Where Nations Began", Science 83, Oct. 1983, pp.42-51.</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00317">317. MOORE, R.I., (Editor), The Hamlyn Historical Atlas. (Hamlyn, London, N.Y., Sydney, Toronto, 1981).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00318">318. PRIESTLEY, J.B., Literature &#38; Western Man. (Harper &#38; Bros., New York, 1960). &#160;</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00319">319. WILSON, EDMUND, The Dead Sea Scrolls. (Oxford University Press, New York, 1969).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00320">320. SELTMAN, CHARLES, Women in Antiquity. (Cambridge University).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00321">321. SWAIN, JOSEPH WARD, The Ancient World, Vol. II. (Harper &#38; Bros., New York, 1950).</p>
        <p id="rw-p_49399-00322">322. FOSDICK, HARRY EMERSON, Riverside Sermons. (Harper &#38; Bros., New York, 1958).</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</body>

</html>


